The Territorial papers of the United States., v.2 1934. | HathiTrust Digital Library

Use of this online version is subject to all U.S. copyright laws. Please do not save or redistribute this file.
For questions or comments, contact HathiTrust.org at 



Full Bibliographic Information
Title
The Territorial papers of the United States., v.2 1934.
Published 
Washington, D.C. :U.S. G.P.O.,1934-
Description 
volumes ;26 cm.
Rights 

Permanent URL 

Table of Contents








Book Text
Front Cover
Page Scan 1
Blank page
Page Scan 2
ARTES SC1ENTIA VERITA
This page contains an image.
Page Scan 3
Blank page
Page Scan 4
Blank page
Page Scan 5
Blank page
Page Scan 6
! 0 4
Page i
THE TERRITORIAL PAPERS OF THE UNITED STATES
Page ii
Blank page
End of Front Cover. Continue to next section or 
Title Page
Page iii
THE TERRITORIAL PAPERS OF THE UNITED STATES Compiled and edited by Clarence Edwin Carter VOLUME II The Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, 1787-1803

UNITED sTATEs GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WAsHINGTON: 1934 For 8ale hy the superintendent of Document8, Wa8hington, D.C. Price $2.00 (Cloth)
This page contains an image.
Page iv
JK "A3 Publication No. 636 J
End of Title Page. Continue to next section or 
Section
Page v
FOREWORD The Department of State is pleased to inaugurate a series of vol- umes embodying the Territorial Papers of the United States as found in the archives of the Government. It is fitting to point out that this comprehensive undertaking represents the fruition of the urgent rec- ommendations of eminent historians, who sensed the value of these papers in connection with the growing importance of the history of the constitutional system of the United States and the expansion of the Nation. An orderly presentation of the materials relating to the constitutional and political beginnings of such frontier states as Ohio, Tennessee, Mississippi, Illinois, and Arkansas, and of such later states as Minnesota, Oregon, Nebraska, Colorado, and Arizona, to mention at random only a few of the thirty states which were once frontier territories, has long been viewed as essential to an understanding of the American system of Federal Government. An express sanction of Congress has finally made possible the publication of these sources, and they will henceforth be available, as the volumes progressively appear, in every part of the Union. Historians, lawyers, teachers, and students in Alabama, Wisconsin, and Kansas will thus have im- mediately accessible the sources of the early history of their respective states, and, similarly, in the same collection the sources of the begin- nings of Washington, Michigan, and Louisiana, and of every other state that was once a territory. In rendering this public service it is the confident belief that the general availability of these significant records of our national history will contribute to a better understand- ing of the growth of the American Nation. Cordeul Hull Secretary of State Washington, D. C. in
Page vi
t
Page vii
PREFACE There is presented in these volumes a selection of papers embody- ing relevant materials on the history of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, drawn principally from the archives in Washington, D. C. Altogether some 700 papers, exclusive of the Journal of Exec- utive Proceedings, are included in this edition. A copy of the Journal, which is a composite document of great length containing a consider- able number of additional letters and other documents, is found, with parts missing, in the archives of the Department of State; it is in the form of an official copy transmitted at intervals to the Secretary of State by the secretary of the Territory. The recent discovery of the original, now in the possession of the Ohio Archaeological and His- torical Society, has made possible its complete and correct publica- tion. Fortunately the originals of a number of letters preserved only in the form of copies in the Federal archives, as well as a few official letters now missing from the files in Washington, have been found in collections in more distant places. The quantity of papers available for publication is abundant; it is plainly impossible, within the limits of a reasonable appropriation of funds, to reproduce in extenso sources of every category found in the archives which pertain to the Territory. For this installment a selec- tion has been made on the basis of the criterion as described in the introductory statement in volume I on the scope and method of the series. The feature with which the present volumes is chiefly con- cerned, is, therefore, the administration of the Territory, which is interpreted to comprehend that of public lands. On the following pages will be found correspondence, and other papers, passing between the governor and secretaries, respectively, of the Territory and the President of the United States, the Secretaries of State, Treasury, and War, the Attorney General, and the Postmas- ter General; similarly, the correspondence of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Surveyor General of the land, the Secretary of War, and certain of the more important military heads in the territory. Radi- ating from these principal lines are selected papers of lesser officials, such as letters of the judges of the general court, and of the receivers and registers of land offices. Less numerously the following classes of papers appear: petitions of groups of inhabitants for redress of political and other grievances, and documents relating to land titles derived from antecedent French, British, and Virginia periods. An occasional relevant T
Page viii
VIII PREFACE originals; others are copies of copies, in which the names of persons are sometimes strangely transformed, not infrequently beyond possible identification. This is particularly true for French names. A second difficulty arises from the fact that a given individual some- times spelled his name differently in successive documents. Such variants are allowed to remain, though an effort is made to ascertain the correct spelling. Under ordinary circumstances the usage of the individual is followed, but where variants in his own usage occur, appeal is taken, wherever possible, to documents of record, which possess at least a presumption of authority. Whatever result is obtained from the search, which is often negative, is indicated in the footnotes. In planning the form and scope of the series, and of these volumes, the editor has had the benefit of the enthusiastic interest, wise counsel, and unfailing encouragement of Dr. Hunter Miller, Historical Adviser of the Department of State, in whose division this project was first administered. It is also a pleasure to acknowledge the services of Dr. Cyril Wynne, Chief of the Division of Research and Publication, who has guided the staff of the editorial office through the mazes of administrative detail incident to its establishment and who has facilitated the undertaking by innumerable kindnesses. The editor is also especially obligated to Mr. Charles B. Galbreath, Secretary of the Ohio Archaeological and Historical Society, for generously per- mitting the use of the Journal of Executive Proceedings in the terri- tory and for rendering valuable assistance in procuring an accurate reproduction of that indispensable document. Numerous citations to documentary sources in the Wisconsin Historical Society are due to the generous cooperation of Professor Randolph C. Downes, of the Univer- sity of Pittsburgh. In a production of this character the execution of a multitude of tasks must necessarily devolve upon those immediately associated with the editor; the intelligent labor and loyal cooperation of his editorial assistants, Mr. Fred W. Shipman and Mrs. Lillie R. Carter, and of Mrs. Grace A. Grefe, clerk to the staff, and of Miss Inez J. Gardner of the Publishing Section, have been of more intrinsic value than this note of acknowledgment reveals. Entire responsibility for defects in the work is assumed by the editor. C. E. C. Washington, D. C. May 7, 1934.
End of Section. Continue to next section or 
Table of Contents
Page ix
CONTENTS VOLUME II Page Foreword ill Preface v Symbols XI Part One: Papers Relating to the Foundations of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, 1781-1787 .... 1 Two: Papers Relating to the Period of the First Stage of the Government of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, 1787-1791 37 Three: Papers Relating to the Period of the First Stage of the Government of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, 1792-1798 357 Index 659 IX
Page x
Blank page
End of Table of Contents. Continue to next section or 
Section
Page xi
SYMBOLS AD autograph document ADS autograph document signed AL autograph letter ALS autograph letter signed BHR Burton Historical Records C copy cc Continental Congress CHS Connecticut Historical Society D draft DPL Detroit Public Library DS document signed E extract GLO General Land Office HF House Files HSP Historical Society of Pennsylvania IHC Illinois Historical Collections IHS Illinois Historical Society LC Library of Congress LPC letter press copy LS letter signed MHS Massachusetts Historical Society NYHS New York Historical Society OHS Ohio Archaeological and Historical Society OSL Ohio State Library PO Post Office Department SD State Department SF Senate Files SG Surveyor General TD Treasury Department WD War Department XI
Page xii
Blank page
Page 1
PART ONE Papers relating to the Foundations of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio 1781-1787 11U3M« 2
Page 2
Blank page
End of Section. Continue to next section or 
Section 1
Page 3
PART ONE NEW YORK: CESSION OF WESTERN LAND CLAIMS [LC: CC Papers, West. Land Cessions: DS 1] [March 1, 1781] To all People who shall see these presents, We James Duane, William Floyd and Alexander McDougall the underwritten Delegates for the State of New York in the honorable Congress of the united States of America send Greeting. Whereas by an Act of the Legislature of the said State of New York passed at a Session held at Albany in the Year of our Lord One Thousand seven Hundred and eighty, entitled An Act to facilitate the Completion of the Articles of Confederation and perpetual Union among the United States of America 2 it is declared that the People of the State of New York were on all Occasions disposed to manifest their Regard for their Sister States, and their earnest desire to promote the General Interest and Security, and more especially to accelerate the fcederal Alliance, by removing as far as it depended upon them the Impediment to it's final Accomplishment respecting the Waste and uncultivated Lands within the Limits of Certain States: And it is therfore thereby enacted by the People of the said State of New York represented in Senate and Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, that it should and might be lawful to and for the Dele- gates of the said State in the honorable Congress, And they or the major part of them so assembled are thereby fully authorized and empowered for and on Behalf of that State, and by proper and au- thentic Acts or Instruments to limit and restrict the Boundaries of the said State in such Manner and form as they shall judge to be expedient either with respect to the Jurisdiction as well as the Right or Pre-emption of Soil; or Reserving the Jurisdiction in part or in the whole over the Lands which may be ceded, or relinquished with respect only to the Right of Pre-emption of the Soil: And by the said Act it is further enacted, that the Territory which may be ceded 1 There are certain differences between the text herewith presented, which has been taken from the original deed, and the copy in the Journals of Congress. These pertain mainly to spelling, punctuation, paragraphing, and capitalization. The most important of these are punctuation differences, some fifty in number, most of which are capable of obscuring the meaning. Cf. Journals Cant. Cong. (LC ed.), XIX, 211-212. 1 Feb. 19, 1780, ibid., pp. 208-209. In the Journals the title is in quotatior marks. S
Page 4
4 TERRITORIAL PAPERS or relinquished by Virtue thereof either with respect to the Jurisdic- tion as well as the Right or pre-emption of Soil, or the Right or Pre-emption of Soil only, shall be and enure for the Use and Benefit of such of the United States as shall become Members of the foederal Alliance of the said States, and for no other Use or purpose whatso- ever. And by the said Act it is provided and enacted that the Trust reposed by virtue thereof shall not be executed by the Delegates of the said State unless at least three of the said Delegates shall be present in Congress. And Whereas by Letters patent under the great Seal of the said State of New York bearing date the Twenty ninth day of October last past, Reciting, that the Senate and As- sembly had on the twelfth day of September then last past nominated and appointed us the said James Duane, William Floyd and Alexander McDougall, together with John Morin Scott and Ezre3 L'Hom- medieu Delegates to represent the said State in the Congress of the United States of North America. Therefore in Pursuance of the said Nomination and Appointment, The People of the said State of New York did thereby commission us the said James Duane, William Floyd and Alexander M°Dougall and the said John Morin Scott and Ezre L'Hommedieu or any Majority who should from time to time attend the said Congress, And if only one of the said Delegates should at any time be present in the said Congress he should in such case be authorized to represent the said State in the said Congress, As by an authentic Copy of the said Act and an Exemplification of the said Commission remaining among the Archives of Congress fully appears. Now 4 therefore know ye that We the said James Duane, William Floyd and Alexander M°Dougall, by Virtue of the Power and Authority, and in the Execution of the Trust reposed in us as aforesaid, have judged it expedient to limit and restrict, And we do by these Presents, for and On Behalf of the said State of New York, limit and restrict the Boundaries of the said State in the western parts thereof, with respect to the Jurisdiction as well as the Right or Pre-emption of Soil, by the Lines and in the form following,5 that is to say, A Line from the Northeast Corner of the State of Pennsyl- vania along the North Bounds thereof to it's North west Corner continued due West until it shall be intersected by a meridian Line to be drawn from the forty fifth Degree of North Latitude through the most westerly Bent or Inclination of Lake Ontario, Thence by the said meridian Line to the forty fifth Degree of North Latitude, and thence by the said forty fifth Degree of North Latitude. But if ■ In the Journals the spelling is Ezra, which is correct. 4 A new paragraph in the Journals. 1 A draft of "Instructions," adopted by the Legislature to accompany the act, is printed in Rept. of University on Boundaries State of N. Y., I, 151-154. This report contains relevant documents concerning New York's claim to Iroquois lands in the west, ibid., pp. 65-141.
Page 5
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 5 on Experiment the above described meridian Line shall not compre- hend Twenty Miles due West from the most westerly Bent or Incli- nation of the River or Strait of Niagara, Then we do by these presents in the Name of the people and for and on Behalf of the State of New York, and by Virtue of the Authority aforesaid, limit and restrict the Boundaries of the said State in the western parts thereof with respect to Jurisdiction as well as the Right or Pre-emption of Soil by the Lines and in the Manner following, that is to say.—A Line from the North East Corner of the State of Pennsylvania along the North Bounds thereof to it's North West Corner continued due West until it shall be intersected by a meridian Line to be drawn from the forty nth degree of North Latitude through a point twenty Miles due West from the most westerly Bent or Inclination of the River or Strait of Niagara, Thence by the said meridian Line to the forty fifth degree of North Latitude, and thence by the said forty fifth Degree of North Latitude. And we do by these presents, in the Name of the People and for and on Behalf of the State of New York and by Virtue of the Power and Trust committed to us by the said Act and Commission, cede, transfer and for ever relinquish to and for the only Use and Benefit of such of the States as are or shall become Parties to the Articles of Confederation, All the Right, Title, Interest, Jurisdiction and Claim of the said State of New York to all Lands and Territories to the Northward and Westward of the Bound- aries to which the said State is in Manner aforesaid limited and restricted, And to be granted, disposed of and appropriated in such Manner only as the Congress of the said United or confederated States shall order and direct.6 In 7 Testimony whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Names and affixed our Seals in Congress the first day of March in the Year of our Lord One Thousand seven Hundred and eighty one, And of our Independence the fifth. Sealed and delivered Ja8 Duane [L. s.] in presence of Wra Floyd [L. s.] Cha Thomson Alex: Mc Doug all [L. s.j Cha: Morse Ebenezer Smith [Endorsed] New York Cession of Western Territory Executed by the Delegates from that State March 1" 1781.8—Recorded page 1. • Thus was abandoned the shadowy title held from the Six Nations of Indians; with the exception of the "Erie purchase," now a part of Pennsylvania, no part was held from royal grant. New York's claim to the hunting grounds of the Iroquois was based on various treaties; for those of 1701 and 1726, see Docs. rel. Col. Hist. State N. Y., IV, 908-910, v, 800-801. See also review of claims in report of committee of Congress, received Nov. 3, 1781 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 1), and considered May 1, 1782 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxu, 228-232). 7 A new paragraph in the Journals. » The "declaration" of the delegates, which is printed in Journals Cont. Cong.
Page 6
6 TERRITORIAL PAPERS VIRGINIA: CESSION OF WESTERN LAND CLAIMS [LC: CC Papers, West. Land Cessions: DS9] [March 1, 1784] To all who shall see these presents We Thomas Jefferson, Samuel Hardy, Arthur Lee and James Monroe the underwritten, delegates for the Commonwealth in Virginia in the Congress of the United States of America send Greeting— Whereas the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia at their sessions begun on the twentieth day of October one thousand seven hundred & eighty three passed an Act entitled "an Act to authorize the delegates of this State in Congress to convey to the United States in Congress Assembled all the right of this Common- wealth to the Territory North-Westward of the River Ohio." in these words following to wit10— "Whereas the Congress of the United States did by their Act of the sixth day of September in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty 11 recommend to the several States in the Union having claims to waste and unappropriated Lands in the Western Country a liberal Cession to the United States of a portion of their respective claims for the common Benefit of the Union. And Whereas this Common- wealth did on the second day of January in the year one thousand seven hundred & Eighty one 12 yield to the Congress of the United States for the Benefit of the said States all right, title & claim which the said Commonwealth had to the Territory North-West of the River Ohio subject to the Conditions annexed to the said Act of Cession And Whereas the United States in Congress Assembled have (LC ed.), xix, 210, assumed the right of the State of New York to define her own boundaries in connection with the proposed cession of her claims to western territory. This assumption Congress declined to confirm. See resolution of acceptance, Oct. 29, 1782, i6t<f., xxm, 694-695. For an account of the opposi- tion of Virginia (which cast the lone vote against acceptance) to New York's pretensions, see Winsor, West. Movement, pp. 199-200, 205-209. The legislative stages intervening between the date of the tender by New York and its accept- ance by Congress are found in Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xvII, 806-807, xviii, 915-916, XX, 704, XXI, 1076-1078, 1098, 1113, XXII, 191-194, 223-233, 240-241, 423-424; Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), x, 548. • In the handwriting of Thomas Jefferson. As in the case of other contemporary deeds of cession, the version in the original Virginia deed differs from that found in the Journals. Cf. Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvi, 113-116. For the various antecedent stages of the negotiations between Congress and Virginia, see ibid., xvn, 808, xvm, 915-916, XX, 704, 784, 1077, 1098, 1113, xxil, 191, 227, XXIV, 104, 271, 381, 384, 406-409, 444, xxv, 552, 554, 559-564, 962, 968, 972, 973, 987, 988, XxvI, 89-90. »• Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), xi, 326-328. 11 Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xvn, 806-807. "Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), x, 564-566.
Page 7
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 7 by their Act of the thirteenth of September last13 stipulated the terms on which they agree to accept the Cession of this State should the Legislature approve thereof which Terms although they do not come fully up to the propositions of this Commonwealth are conceived on the whole to approach so nearly to them as to induce this State to accept thereof in full confidence that Congress will in justice to this State for the liberal Cession she hath made earnestly press upon the other States claiming large Tracts of waste and uncultivated Territory the propriety of making Cessions equally liberal for the common Benefit and support of the Union Be it enacted by the General Assembly that it shall and may be lawful for the delegates of this State to the Congress of the United States or such of them as shall be assembled in Congress and the said delegates or such of them so assembled are hereby fully authorized and empowered for and on behalf of this State by proper deeds or instrument in writing under their Hands and Seals to convey, transfer, assign and make over unto the United States in Congress Assembled for the Benefit of the said States all right title and claim as well of soil as jurisdiction which this Commonwealth hath to the Territory or Tract of Country within the limits of the Virginia Charter situate lying and being to the North- West of the River Ohio subject to the terms and conditions contained in the before recited Act of Congress of the thirteenth day of Septem- ber last that is to say upon condition that the Territory so ceded shall be laid out and formed into States containing a suitable extent of Territory not less than one hundred nor more than one hundred and fifty miles square or as near thereto as circumstances will admit and that the States so formed shall be distinct Republican States and admitted members of the foederal union, having the same rights of Sovereignty, Freedom and Independence as the other States 14—That the necessary and reasonable expences incurred by this State in sub- duing any British Posts or in maintaing Forts or Garrisons, within and for the defence or in acquiring any part of the Territory so Ceded or relinquished shall be fully reimbursed by the United States and that one Commissioner shall be appointed by Congress one by this Commonwealth and another by those two Commissioners who or a majority of them shall be authorized and empowered to adjust and liquidate the account of the necessary and reasonable expences in- curred by this State which they shall judge to be comprized within the intent and meaning of the Act of Congress of the tenth of October one thousand seven hundred and Eighty respecting such expences 1S— ■ Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxv, 559-564. "See second act of cession, Dec. 30, 1788, revoking the foregoing stipulation, post, p. 172. u See report of the Virginia commissioners, May 1, 1788, James (ed.), G. R. Clark Papers (IHC, xix), 465-477.
Page 8
8 TERRITORIAL PAPERS That the French and Canadian Inhabitants and other Settlers of the Kaskaskies St Vincents and the neighbouring Villages who have professed themselves Citizens of Virginia shall have their possessions and titles confirmed to them and be protected in the enjoyment of their rights and liberties 18—That a quantity not exceeding one hundred and fifty thousand Acres of Land promised by this State shall be allowed and granted to the then Colonel now General George Rogers Clarke and to the Officers and Soldiers of his Regiment who marched with him when the posts of Kaskaskies and Sl Vincents were reduced and to the Officers and Soldiers that have been since incorpo- rated into the said Regiment to be laid off in one Tract the length of which not to exceed double the breadth in such place on the North- West Side of the Ohio as a majority of the Officers shall choose and to be afterwards divided among the said Officers and Soldiers in due proportion according to the Laws of Virginia.17 That in case the quantity of good Lands on the South-East side of the Ohio upon the Waters of Cumberland River and between the Green River and Tenessee river which have been reserved by Law for the Virginia Troops upon Continental establishment should from the North Carolina line bearing in further upon the Cumberland Lands than was expected prove insufficient for their legal Bounties the deficiency should be made up to the said Troops in good Lands to be laid off between the Rivers Scioto & little Miami on the north-West Side of the River Ohio in such proportions as have been engaged to them by the Laws of Virginia 18—That all the Lands within the Territory so Ceded to the United States and not reserved for or appropriated to any of the before mentioned purposes or disposed of in bounties to the Officers and Soldiers of the American Army shall be considered as a common fund for the use and benefit of such of the United States as have become or shall become members of the Confederation or foederal Alliance of the said States Virginia inclusive according to their usual respective proportions in the general charge and expendi- ture and shall be faithfully and bona fide disposed of for that purpose and for no other use or purpose whatsoever. Provided that the Trust "See confirmation in ordinance of July 13, 1787, post, p. 40; and proclamation of Governor St. Clair, May 5, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 306. 17 In accordance with a resolution of the Virginia Assembly, not a statute, a point later in controversy, June 30, 1780 (James, ed., G. R. Clark Papers, IHC, VIII, 428-430). The statutes which follow, in 1783, 1786, and 1790, are in Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), XI, 385-387, xii, 397-398, xm, 147-150, 178. See acts of Aug. 10, 1790, post, p. 296; June 9, 1794, 1 Stat. 394; May 13, 1800, 2 Stat. 80; and 2 Stat. 437, 477, 555, 589. This provision in the deed of cession, and the various Virginia acts relating to grants of land for military services precedent thereto, came up for judicial construction in 1832, in Wallace v. Parker, 6 Peters, 680-690, and in Hughes v. Trustees Town of Clarksville (1832), 6 Peters, 369-388 (opinions by Chief Justice Marshall).
Page 9
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 9 hereby reposed in the delegates of this State shall not be executed unless three of them at least are present in Congress." And Whereas the said General Assembly by their Resolution of June sixth one thousand seven hundred & Eighty three had constituted and appointed us the said Thomas Jefferson, Samuel Hardy, Arthur Lee and James Monroe delegates to represent the said Commonwealth in Congress for one year from the first Monday in November then next following, which Resolution remains in full force Now therefore Know Ye that we the said Thomas Jefferson, Samuel Hardy, Arthur Lee and James Monroe by virtue of the power and authority com- mitted to us by the Act of the said General Assembly of Virginia before recited, and in the name & for & on behalf of the said Common- wealth do by these presents convey, transfer, assign and make over unto the United States in Congress Assembled for the benefit of the said States, Virginia inclusive all right, title and claim as well of soil as of jurisdiction which the said Commonwealth hath to the Territory or tract of Country within the limits of the Virginia Charter, situate, lying and being to the North-West of the River Ohio, to and for the uses & purposes and on the Conditions of the said recited Act. In Testimony whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Names and affixed our Seals in Congress the first day of March19 in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred & Eighty four and of the Independence of the United States the Eighth." Sign'd, Sealed and Th: Jefferson [l. s.] Delivered in presence of— S: Hardy [L. s.] Cha Thomson Arthur Lee [L. s.] Henry Remsen Jr Ja" Monroe [l. s.j Benj" Bankson Junr 20 [Endorsed] Virginia Cession of Western Territory executed by Delegates of that State March 1" 1784—Recorded page 721 "In the Journals copy the date is left in blank. 30 Remsen and Bankson were clerks in the office of the Secretary of Congress. The copy in the Journals is in the handwriting of Remsen. The latter, a citizen of New York, was elected as Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs on Mar. 2, 1784 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxvi, 122), and was given charge of the papers relating to foreign affairs, an office which he held until the end of the Confederation government, when he became one of the two chief clerks in the Department of State. From 1790 to 1792 he was chief clerk in the Department (Amer. Foreign Service Journal, IX, 266-267). "Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvi, 117.
Page 10
10 TERRITORIAL PAPERS MASSACHUSETTS: CESSION OF WESTERN LAND CLAIMS [LC: CC Papers, West. Land Cessions: DS"] [April 19, 1785] To all who shall see these presents, We Samuel Holten and Rufus King the under written Delegates for the Commonwealth of Massa- chusetts in the Congress of the United States of America send Greeting: Whereas the General Court of Massachusetts on the thirteenth day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty four passed an Act intitled "An Act empowering the Delegates of this Commonwealth in the United States in Congress assembled to relinquish to the United States certain lands the property of this Commonwealth,"23 in the words following, "Whereas several of the States in the Union have at present no interest in the great and extensive tract of uncultivated country lying in the westerly part of the United States and it may be reasonable that the States above mentioned should be interested in the aforesaid Country, Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court Assembled and by the authority of the same, that the Delegates of this Commonwealth in the United States in Congress Assembled, or any three of the said Delegates be and they hereby are authorised and empowered for and in behalf of this Commonwealth to Cede or relinquish, by authentic conveyance or conveyances to the United States to be disposed of, for the common benefit of the same agreeably to a Resolve of Congress of October the tenth One thousand seven hundred and eighty, such part of that tract of Land belonging to this Commonwealth which lies between the Rivers Hudson and Mississipi as they may think proper, and to make the said Cession in such manner and on such conditions as shall appear to them to be most suitable." And whereas the said General Court on the seventeenth day of March in the Year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and eighty five passed one other Act24 intitled "An Act in addition to an Act in- titled An Act empowering the Delegates of this Commonwealth in the United States in Congress Assembled to relinquish to the United States certain Lands the property of this Commonwealth" in the words following, "Whereas by the Act aforesaid three Delegates representing this State in Congress are necessary to make the Cession aforesaid, and it may be Necessary that the said business should be performed by a less number of the said Delegates, Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, 22 Printed also in Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvm, 281-283. * Acts and Laws Gen. Court. Mass., 1784, p. 218. "Ibid., pp. 273-274.
Page 11
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 11 and by the authority of the same that any two Delegates, representing this Commonwealth in Congress, be and hereby are authorised and empowered, to do and perform all matters and things which by the Act aforesaid might be done and performed, by any three Delegates as aforesaid any thing in the aforesaid act notwithstanding." And Whereas the said General Court on the seventeenth day of June in the aforesaid year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and eighty four did nominate and appoint the aforesaid Samuel Holten, and on the third day of November following the aforesaid Rufus King Delegates to represent the said Commonwealth of Mas- sachusetts in the Congress of the United States of America for one year from the first monday of November in the said year one thou- sand seven hundred and eighty four which appointment remains in full force. Now therefore know ye, that we the said Samuel Holten and Rufus King by virtue of the power and authority to us committed by the said Acts of the General Court of Massachusetts before recited, in the name and for and on behalf of the said Commonwealth of Massachusetts, do by these presents assign transfer, quit claim, cede and convey to the United States of America for their benefit Massa- chusetts inclusive, all right, title and estate, of and in as well the soil as the Jurisdiction which the said Commonwealth hath to the Ter- ritory or tract of Country within the limits of the Massachusetts Charter, situate and lying west of the following line. That is to say a Meridian line to be drawn from the forty-fifth degree of North Latitude, through the westerly bent or inclination of Lake Ontario, thence by the said Meridian line to the most Southerly side line of the Territory contained in the Massachusetts Charter; but if on experiment the above described Meridian line shall not comprehend twenty miles due west from the most westerly bent or inclination of the River or Strait of Niagara, then we do by these presents by virtue of the power and authority aforesaid in the Name and on the behalf of the said Commonwealth of Massachusetts transfer quit claim, cede and convey to the United States of America for their benefit Massachusetts inclusive, all right, title, and estate, of an[d] in, as well the soil as the Jurisdiction which the said Commonwealth hath to the Territory or tract of Country within the limits of the Massachusetts Charter, situate and lying west of the following line. That is to say, a Meridian line to be drawn from the forty-fifth degree of North Latitude through a point twenty miles due West from the most westerly bent or inclination of the river or Strait of Niagara, thence by the said Meridian line to the most Southerly side line of the Territory contained in the Massachusetts Charter aforesaid,25 for u This included the small portion on Lake Erie just west of the present State of New York, which the United States sold to Pennsylvania, Mar. 3, 1793, for $15,640.
Page 12
12 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the purposes in the said recited Acts declared, and to the uses in a Resolve of Congress of the tenth day of October one thousand seven hundred and eighty mentioned.26 In testimony whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Names and affixed our Seals in Congress this Nineteenth day of April in the year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and eighty-five and of the Independence of the United States of America the Ninth.— s. holten (l. s.) Rufus King (l. s.) Signed Sealed and delivered in the presence of Benj" Bankson Junr John Fisher Robert Patton [Endorsed] Cession of western Territory by Massachusetts 19th April 1785 Recorded p. 13.27 LAND ORDINANCE OF 1785 [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [May 20, 1785] An Ordinance for ascertaining the mode of disposing of Lands in the Western territory 28 Be it ordained by the United States in Congress assembled That the territory ceded by individual States to the United States which has been purchased of the Indian inhabitants shall be disposed of in the following manner A Surveyor from each State shall be appointed by Congress or a committee of the States, who shall take an oath for the faithful dis- charge of his duty before the Geographer of the United States, who is hereby empowered and directed to administer the same; and the like oath shall be administered to each chain carrier by the surveyor under whom he acts. * Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xvm, 915-916. "The deed of cession was immediately accepted by Congress, ibid., xxvm, 283. "For the various stages of this legislation, see Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), XxvIII, 178, 251-256 (draft of act), 290-291, 292, 296, 309-310, 316-317, 322-323, 326-329, 339-340, 342-343, 370-373, 375-381 (text of ordinance on third reading and final passage, May 20, 1785). The foregoing page references also contain citations to various relevant documents found in CC Papers, Library of Congress. A printed copy of the ordinance in final form, signed by Charles Thomson, is in CC Papers. From this text have come all subsequent printings of the instru- ment. The variations between the Journals text (which is the final authority) and the printed version are numerous, comprehending over 180 differences in punc- tuation alone. Other variations, except as hereinafter noted, are not significant.
Page 13
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 13 The Geographer, under whose direction the surveyors shall act, shall occasionally form such regulations for their conduct, as he shall deem necessary; and shall have authority to suspend them for mis- conduct in Office and shall make report of the same to Congress or to the Committee of the States, and he shall make report in case of sickness, death or resignation of any surveyor. The Surveyors as they are respectively qualified shall proceed to divide the said territory into townships of six miles square, by lines running due north and south and others crossing these at right angles as near as may be, unless where the boundaries of the late Indian purchases may render the same impracticable, and then they shall depart from this rule no farther than such particular circumstances may require; and each surveyor shall be allowed and paid at the rate of two dollars for every mile in length he shall run, including the wages of chain carriers, markers and every other expence attending the same. The first line running north and south as aforesaid shall begin on the river Ohio at a point that shall be found to be due north from the western termination of a line which has been run as the southern boundary of the state of Pennsylvania and the first line running east and west shall begin at the same point and shall extend throughout the whole territory Provided that nothing herein shall be construed as fixing the western boundary of the State of Pensylvania. The geographer shall designate the townships or fractional parts of town- ships by numbers progressively from south to North, always beginning each range with number one; and the ranges shall be distinguished by their progressive numbers to the westward. The first range extending from the Ohio to the lake Erie being marked number one. The Geographer shall personally attend to the running of the first east and west line and shall take the latitude of the extremes of the first north and south line and of the mouths of the principal rivers.29 The lines shall be measured with a chain; shall be plainly marked by chaps on the trees and exactly described on a plat, whereon shall be noted by the Surveyor, at their proper distances, all mines, salt springs, salt licks and mill seats, that shall come to his knowledge, and all water courses mountains and other remarkable and permanent things over or near which such lines shall pass and also the quality of the lands. The plats of the townships respectively shall be marked by sub- divisions into lots of one mile square or 640 acres, in the same direction as the external lines and numbered from 1 to 36, always beginning the succeeding range of the lots with the number next to that with which the preceding one concluded. And where, from the causes before "The rectangular system thus described is traceable to North Carolina practice (N. C. Pub. Acts, Martin, ed., I, 207). See also letter of Hugh Williamson, July 5,1784, State Recs. N. C., xvii, 80.
Page 14
14 TERRITORIAL PAPERS mentioned, only a fractional part of a township shall be surveyed, the lots protracted thereon shall bear the same numbers as if the town- ship had been entire. And the surveyors in running the external lines of the townships shall at the interval of every mile mark corners for the lots which are adjacent, always designating the same in a differ- ent manner from those of the townships30 The geographer and surveyors shall pay the utmost attention to the variation of the magnetic needle, and shall run and note all lines by the true meridian, certifying with every plat what was the variation at the times of running the lines thereon noted. As soon as seven ranges of townships & fractional parts of townships in the direction from south to north shall have been surveyed, the geographer shall transmit plats thereof to the board of treasury, who shall record the same with the report in well bound books to be kept for that purpose: And the geographer shall make similar returns from time to time of every seven ranges as they may be surveyed. The secretary at war shall have recourse thereto, and shall take by lot therefrom a number of townships & fractional parts of townships as well from those to be sold entire as from those to be sold in lots as will be equal to one seventh part of the whole of such seven ranges as nearly as may be, for the use of the late continental army; and he shall make a similar draught from time to time until a sufficient quantity is drawn to satisfy the same, to be applied in manner here- in after directed. [The board of treasury shall from time to time cause the remaining numbers, as well those to be sold entire as those to be sold in lots, to be drawn for in the name of the thirteen states respectively according to the quotas in the last preceding requisition on all the states; provided that in Case more land than its proportion is alloted for sale in any state at any distribution, a deduction be made therefor at the next31] The board of treasury shall transmit a copy of the original plats previously noting thereon the townships & fractional parts of town- ships, which shall have fallen to the several states by the distribution aforesaid to the Commissioners of the loan office of the several states, who after giving notice of not less than two nor more than six months by causing advertisements to be posted up at the court houses or other noted places in every county and to be inserted in one newspaper published in the states of their residence respectively shall proceed to ,0 An explanation of the origin of the system of surveys established by this instrument is found in Ford, Col. Precedents Nat. Land System, passim. See also acts of May 18, 1796, post, p. 552, May 10, 1800, post, in, 88, and Putnam to Captain Biggs, Apr. 22, 1801, post, III, 130. »1 Repealed July 9, 1788, see post, p. 122. The brackets are editorial.
Page 15
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 15 sell the townships or fractional parts of townships at public vendue," in the following manner, viz. The township or fractional part of a township N 1. in the first range shall be sold entire, and N. 2 in the same range by lots, and thus in alternate order through the whole of the first range. The township or fractional part of a township N 1. in the second range shall be sold by lots, and N. 2 in the same range entire, and so in alternate order through the whole of the second range; and the third range shall be sold in the same manner as the first and the fourth in the same manner as the second and thus alternately throughout all the ranges; provided that none of the lands within the said territory be sold under the price of one dollar the acre to be paid in specie or loan office certificates reduced to specie value by the scale of depreciation or certificates of liquidated debts of the United States including interest, besides the expence of the survey and other charges thereon, which are hereby rated at thirty six dollars the township in specie or certificates as aforesaid, and so in the same proportion for a fractional part of a township or of a lot, to be paid at the time of sales, on failure of which payment the said lands shall again be offered for sale. There shall be reserved for the United States out of every township the four lots being numbered, 8. 11. 26. 29 and out of every fractional part of a township so many lots of the same numbers as shall be found thereon for future sale: There shall be reserved the lot N 16 of every township for the maintenance of public schools within the said town- ship; also one third part of all gold, silver, lead and copper mines, to be sold or otherwise disposed of as Congress shall hereafter direct.83 When any township or fractional part of a township shall have been sold as aforesaid and the money or certificates received therefor, the loan officer shall deliver a deed in the following terms. The United States of America to all to whom these presents shall come greeting. Know34 ye, that for the consideration of [blank] dollars we have granted and hereby do grant & confirm unto [blank] the township (or fractional part of the township, as the case may be) numbered [blank] in the range [blank], excepting therefrom and reserving one third part of all gold, silver lead and copper mines within the same and the lots N 8.11.26. & 29 for future sale or dis- position, and the lot N 16 for the maintenance of public schools. To have to the said [blank] his heirs and assigns for ever (or if more than "The principle of public vendue as opposed to private sale arose from the prac- tice in New England and New York (Conn. Col. Recs., VIn, 134-137; N. Y. Laws, 1792, Greenleaf, ed., n, 334). British royal instructions of 1774 to Governor Tryon of New York are similar (Docs. rel. Col. Hist. State N. Y., VIII, 410-412). » See enabling act of Apr. 30, 1802, 2 STaT. 173-175. u A new paragraph in the printed version.
Page 16
16 TERRITORIAL PAPERS one purchaser to the said [blank] their heirs and assigns for ever as tenants in Common). In witness whereof (A B) Commissioner of the loan office in the State of [blank] hath, in conformity to the Ordinance passed by the United States in Congress assembled the twentieth day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty five,35 hereunto set his hand & affixed his seal this [blank] day of [blank] in the year of our Lord [blank] and of the independence of the United States of America [blank] And when any township or fractional part of a township shall be sold by lots as aforesaid, the Commissioner of the loan office shall deliver a deed therefor in the following form The United States of America to all to whom these presents shall come greeting. Know38 ye that for the consideration of [blank] dollars we have granted and hereby do grant & confirm unto [blank] the lot (or lots as the case may be)37 in the township (or fractional part of the township as the case may be) numbered [blank] in the range [blank] excepting and reserving one third part of all gold, silver, lead and copper mines within the same for future sale or disposition. To have to the said [blank] his heirs and assigns for ever (or if more than one purchaser, to the said [blank] their heirs and assigns for ever as tenants in common. In Witness whereof (A B) commissioner of the continental38 loan office in the State of [blank] hath, in conformity to the Ordinance passed by the United States in Congress assembled the twentieth day of May in the year of our Lord 1785,39 hereunto set his hand and affixed his Seal this [blank] day of [blank] in the year of our Lord [blank] and of the independence of the United States of America [blank] Which deeds shall be recorded in proper books by the commissioner of the loan office and shall be certified to have been recorded previous to their being delivered to the purchaser, and shall be good and valid to convey the lands in the same described. The commissioners of the loan offices respectively shall transmit to the board of treasury every three months an Account of the town- ships, fractional parts of townships and lots committed to their charge specifying therein the names of the persons to whom sold and the sums of money or certificates received for the same, and shall cause all certificates by them received to be struck through with a circular punch, and they shall be duly charged in the books of the treasury with the amount of the monies or certificates distinguishing the same by them received as aforesaid. zl The date is not given in the printed version. 5» A new paragraph in the printed copy. ,7 Following this the words "numbered [blank]" appear in the official printed copy. 88 "Continental" is omitted in the printed version. *• The date is omitted in the printed copy.
Page 17
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 17 If any township or fractional part of a township or lot remains unsold for eighteen months, after the plat shall have been received by the commissioners of the loan office, the same shall be returned to the board of treasury and shall be sold in such manner as Congress may hereafter direct And whereas Congress by their resolutions of September 16 and 18 in the year 177640 and the 12th of August 178041 stipulated grants of land to certain officers and soldiers of the late continental army and by the resolution of the 22d September 178042 stipulated grants of land to certain officers in the hospital department of the late con- tinental army, for complying therefore with such engagements Be it ordained that the secretary at war, from the returns in his office or such other sufficient evidence as the nature of the case may admit, determine who are the objects of the above resolutions and engage- ments and the quantity of land to which such persons or their repre- sentatives are respectively entitled and cause the townships or frac- tional parts of townships herein before reserved for the use of the late continental army to be drawn for in such manner as he shall deem expedient to answer the purpose of an impartial distribution.43 He shall from time to time transmit certificates to the commissioners of the loan offices of the different states to the lines of which the military claimants have respectively belonged, specifying the name & rank of the party, the terms of his engagement and time of his service and the division, brigade, regiment or company to which he belonged, the quantity of land he is entitled to and the township or fractional part of a township and range out of which his portion is to be taken The Commissioners of the loan offices shall execute deeds for such undivided proportions in manner & form herein before mentioned varying only in such a degree as to make the same conformable to the certificate from the secretary at War. Where any military claimants of bounty in lands shall not have belonged to the line of any particular state, similar certificates shall be sent to the board of treasury who shall execute deeds to the parties for the same. The secretary at War, from the proper returns, shall transmit to the board of treasury a certificate specifying the name and rank of the several claimants of the hospital department of the late continental army together with the quantity of land each claimant is entitled to and the township or fractional part of a township and range out of which his portion is to be taken. And thereupon the board of treas- ury shall proceed to execute deeds to such claimants. ** Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), V, 762-763, 781. »Ibid., xvII, 726-727. "Ibid., xvill, 847-848. 4» See the Secretary at War to the President of Congress, Apr. 26, 1787, post, 12865C—34 3 p. 27.
Page 18
18 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The board of treasury and the commissioners of the loan offices in the states shall within eighteen months return receipts to the secre- tary at war for all deeds which have been delivered, as also all the original deeds which remain in their hands for want of applicants, having been first recorded, which deeds so returned shall be preserved in the office until the parties or their representatives require the same. And be it further Ordained that three townships adjacent to lake Erie be reserved to be hereafter disposed of by Congress for the use of the officers men & others refugees from Canada and the refugees from Nova scotia who are or may be entitled to grants of land under resolutions of Congress now existing 44 or which may hereafter be made respecting them and for such other purposes as Congress may hereafter direct.46 And be it further Ordained that the towns of Gnadenhutten, Schoenbrun and Salem on the Muskingum and so much of the lands adjoining to the said towns with the buildings and improvements thereon shall be reserved for the sole use of the Christian Indians who were formerly settled there or the remains of that Society, as may in the judgment of the Geographer be sufficient for them to cultivate.46 Saving and reserving always to all officers and soldiers entitled to lands on the north west side of the Ohio by donation or bounty from the commonwealth of Virginia and to all persons claiming under them all rights to which they are so entitled under the deed of cession exe- cuted by the delegates for the State of Virginia on the first day of March 178447 and the act of Congress accepting the same;48 and to the end that the said rights may be fully and effectually secured according to the true intent and meaning of the said deed of cession and act aforesaid Be it ordained that no part of the land included between the rivers called little Miami and Scioto on the northwest side of the river Ohio be sold or in any manner alienated until there shall first have been laid off and appropriated for the said Officers and soldiers and persons claiming under them, the lands they are entitled to agreeably to the said deed of cession and act of Congress accepting the same. Done &c49 « Apr. 23, 1783, Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxiv, 268-269; Apr. 13, 1785, ibid., xxvin, 258. « See act of Apr. 7, 1788, 1 Stat. 547. "Act of Sept. 3, 1788, post, p. 153. "Ante, p. 6. "Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvi, 117. *' In the official printed copy the closing sentence is completed: "Done by the United States in Congress assembled, the twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred eighty five, and of our sovereignty and independence the ninth. Charles Thomson, Secretary. Richard H. Lee, President."
Page 19
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 19 THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS TO THE GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA [LC:CC Papers, no. 18, letter book "B", p. 71] Office of Secretary of Congress—July 11th 1786— Sir I have the honor of transmitting to your Excellency herewith enclosed an Act of the United States in Congress Assembled, passed the 7th of the present month.60— Although the inconveniences, which would attend the laying out the western country into Govern- ments of the extent mentioned in the resolution of the 10th Octr 1780," are apparent; yet as this is one of the conditions contained in the cession of Virginia,62 Congress are unwilling to deviate from that plan, until the State shall revise their Act of cession conformably to the recommendation contained in the enclosed Act— I have therefore to request that Your Excellency will be pleased to lay the Act before Your Legislature, and communicate to me the result of their deliberation thereon— With the greatest respect I have the honor &c— His Excellency—The Govr of Virginia— THE REGULATION OF INDIAN AFFAIRS [LC:Original Journals, Cont. Cong.B] [August 7, 1786] An Ordinance for the regulation of Indian Affairs.** Whereas the safety and tranquility of the frontiers of the United States do in some measure depend on the maintaining a good corres- pondence between their citizens and the several nations of Indians in amity with them: And whereas the United States in Congress assembled, under the 9th of the Articles of Confederation and per- petual Union have the sole and exclusive right and power of regulat- ing the trade and managing all affairs with the Indians not members of any of the states, provided that the legislative right of any state within its own limits be not infringed or violated M Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 663. »1 Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xvill, 915-916. » Ante, p. 7. "Printed also in A. S. P., Ind. Affairs, I, 14; Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 677- 678. A comparison of the Journals text with the official printed copy, signed by Charles Thomson (CC Papers, broadsides), which is the derivative of other contemporary and later printed copies, reveals a large number of discrepancies, including fifty-seven varieties of punctuation differences. u A committee to prepare and report an ordinance for the regulation of Indian affairs was appointed Mar. 21, 1786. It was discharged June 6 and a new committee appointed, which reported June 28 (CC Papers, no. 190, Comm. Bk. Repts., 1785-1788). From this point the chronological history of the ordinance may be followed in Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 666, 676-678.
Page 20
20 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Be it ordained by the United States in Congress assembled, that from and after the passing of this Ordinance the Indian department be divided into two districts viz the Southern which shall compre- hend within its limits all the nations in the territory of the United States who reside southward of the river Ohio and the Northern which shall comprehend all the other Indian nations within the said territory and westward of Hudson river provided that all councils, treaties, communications & official transactions between the Super- intendant hereafter mentioned for the northern district and the Indian Nations be held transacted and done at the outpost occupied by the troops of the United States in the said district. That a superintendant be appointed for each of the said districts, who shall continue in office for two Years unless sooner removed by Congress, and shall reside within or as near the district for which he shall be so appointed, as may be convenient for the management of its con- cerns." The said. Superintendants shall attend to the execution of such regulations as Congress shall from time to time establish respect- ing Indian Affairs. The superintendant for the northern district shall have authority to appoint two deputies, to reside in such places as shall best facilitate the regulations of the Indian trade, and to remove them for misbehaviour. There shall be communications of all matters relative to the business of the Indian department kept up between the said superintendants, who shall regularly correspond with the Secretary at War, through whom all communications respecting the Indian department shall be made to Congress; And the superintend- ants are hereby directed to obey all instructions which they shall from time to time receive from the said Secretary at War. And whenever they shall have reason to suspect any tribe or tribes of Indians of hostile intentions, they shall communicate the same to the executive of the State or States, whose territories are subject to the effect of such hostilities. All Stores, provisions or other property which Congress may think necessary for presents to the Indians, shall be in the custody and under the care of the said superintendants, who shall render an annual account of the expenditures of the same to the board of treasury.68— And be it further ordained that none but citizens of the United States shall be suffered to reside among the Indian nations, or be allowed to trade with any nation of Indians within the territory of the United States. That no person, citizen or other, under the penalty of five hundred dollars, shall reside among, or trade with any Indian or Indian nation within the territory of the United States, without ** The superintendent's salary was fixed at $1,000 per annum, that of the deputies at $500 (Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 679). M Cf. the three-department plan inaugurated by Congress in 1776, Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), II, 174-177.
Page 21
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 21 a license for that purpose first obtained from the Superintendent of the district or one of the deputies, who are hereby directed to give such license to every person, who shall produce from the supreme executive of any state a certificate under the seal of the state, that he is of good character and suitably qualified and provided for that employment; for which license he shall pay the sum of fifty dollars to the said superintendant for the use of the United States. That no license to trade with the Indians shall be in force for a longer term than one year; nor shall permits or passports be granted to any other persons than citizens of the United States to travel through the Indian nations, without their having previously made their business known to the superintendant of the district and received his special approbation; That previous to any person or persons obtaining a license to trade as aforesaid he or they shall give bond in three thousand dollars to the superintendant of the district, for the use of the United States, for his or their strict adherence to, and observance of such rules and regula- tions as Congress may from time to time establish for the government of the Indian trade. All sums to be received by the said Superin- tendants, either for licenses or fines, shall be annually accounted for by them with the board of treasury. And be it further ordained, That the said superintendants and the deputies shall not be engaged either directly or indirectly in trade with the Indians, on pain of forfeiting their offices, and each of the super- intendants shall take the following oath, previous to his entering on the duties of his appointment: "I, A.B. do swear that I will well and faithfully serve the United States in the office of superintendant of Indian Affairs for the [blank] district: that I will carefully attend to all such orders and instruc- tions as I shall from time to time receive from the United States in Congress assembled, or the Secretary at War: that I will not be concerned either directly or indirectly in trade with the Indians, and that in all things belonging to my said office, during my continuance therein, I will faithfully, justly and truly, according to the best of my skill and Judgment, do equal & impartial Justice, without fraud, favor, or affection." And the superintendant for the northern district shall administer to his deputies the following oath before they proceed on the duties of their office— "I, A.B. do swear that I will well & faithfully serve the United States in the office of deputy superintendant of Indian Affairs in the northern district—that I will carefully attend to all such orders & instructions as I shall from time to time receive from the United States in Congress Assembled, the Secretary at War, or the Superintendant of the district aforesaid, and that in all things belonging to my said office, during my continuance therein, I will faithfully, justly & truly accord- ing to the best of my skill and judgment do equal and impartial Justice without fraud, favour or affection.—
Page 22
22 TERRITORIAL PAPERS And the said superintendants and deputy Superintendants shall each of them give bond with surety to the board of treasury, in trust for the United States; the Superintendants each in the sum of six thou- sand dollars, and the deputy superintendants each in the sum of three thousand dollars, for the faithful discharge of the duties of their office.— And it is further ordained that all fines and forfeitures which may be incurred by contravening this ordinance, shall be sued for and re- covered before any court of record within the United States—the one moiety thereof to the use of him or them who may prosecute therefor, and the other moiety to the use of the United States—And the said Superintendants shall have power & hereby are authorised by force to restrain therefrom all persons who shall attempt an intercourse with the said Indians without a license therefor obtained as afore- said— And be it further ordained, that in all cases where transactions with any nation or tribe of Indians shall become necessary to the purposes of this ordinance which cannot be done without interfering with the legislative rights of a State, the Superintendant in whose district the same shall happen, shall act in conjunction with the authority of such State67—Done by the United States in Congress Assembled this 7 day of August A D 1786 &c— [Cha: Thomson secy M] CONNECTICUT: CESSION OF WESTERN LAND CLAIMS [LC:CC Papers, West. Land Cessions:DS *] [September 13, 1786] To all who shall see these presents— We William Samuel Johnson and Jonathan Sturges, the underwritten Delegates for the State of Connecticut in the Congress of the United States send Greeting— Whereas the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut on the second Thursday of May, in the Year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and eighty six, passed an Act in the words following M—viz: "Be it enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in "Certain features of the above plan of regulation are adapted from the British system of an earlier date. See "Plan for the Future Management of Indian Affairs (July 10, 1764)", in Docs. rel. Col. Hist. State N. Y., VII, 637-641; Alvord and Carter (eds.), Critical Period (IHC, X), 273-281. "The bracketed portion (editorial) does not appear in the Journals: it is found only in the printed copies. "The original version presented herewith differs from the copy in the Journals of the Continental Congress with respect to punctuation and paragraphing. • CC Papers, Western Lands. For earlier phases see Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), XX, 704, xxi, 784, 1076, 1098, 1113, xxn, 191-194, 240-241, 423, xxiv, 104-105, Xxvin, 432 n.; Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 697-698.
Page 23
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 23 General Court Assembled and by the authority of the same, That the Delegates of this State or any two of them who shall be attending the Congress of the United States be and they are hereby directed, authorized and fully empowered in the name and behalf of this State, to make, execute and deliver under their Hands and Seals an ample Deed of Release and Cession of all the Right, Title, Interest, Jurisdiction and Claim of the State of Connecticut to certain Western Lands beginning at the Completion of the forty first degree of North Latitude One hundred and twenty Miles West of the Western bound- ary Line of the Commonwealth of Pensylvania as now claimed by said Commonwealth, and from thence by a line to be drawn North parallel to and one hundred and twenty Miles West of the said West line of Pensylvania, and to continue North until it comes to forty two degrees and two Minutes North Latitude.61 Whereby all the Right, Title, Interest, Jurisdiction and Claim of the State of Con- necticut to the Lands lying West of said line to be drawn as afore- mentioned One hundred and twenty Miles West of the Western boundary line of the Commonwealth of Pensylvania as now claimed by said Commonwealth shall be included released and Ceded to the United States in Congress Assembled for the common use and benefit of the said States, Connecticut inclusive" And Whereas, the said William Samuel Johnson and Jonathan Sturges were, on the second Thursday of May A. D. one thousand seven hundred and eighty five elected Delegates to represent the State of Connecticut according to the Law of Said state in the Con- gress of the United States for the term of one Year from the first Monday of November in the said Year one thousand seven hundred and eighty five, which Election remains in force and the said William Samuel Johnson and Jonathan Sturges are the lawful Delegates of said State in the Congress of the United States— Now therefore Know Ye that We the said William Samuel Johnson and Jonathan Sturges by Virtue of the Power and Authority to us committed by the said Act of the General Assembly of Connecticut before recited in the Name and for and on behalf of the said State of Connecticut; do by these presents, assign, transfer quit-claim, cede and convey to the United States of America for their benefit Connect- icut inclusive all the Right, Title, Interest, Jurisdiction and Claim which the said State of Connecticut hath in and to the beforemen- tioned and described Territory or Tract of Country as the same is bounded and described in said Act of Assembly for the uses in the said recited Act of Assembly declared— In Witness whereof We have hereunto set our Hands and Seals this thirteenth day of September in the Year of our Lord One thousand "The so-called Connecticut Western Reserve tract. For subsequent cession of the tract to the United States, see deed of cession, Dec. 31, 1798, post, p. 657, and the act of Apr. 28, 1800, post, ill, 84.
Page 24
24 TERRITORIAL PAPERS seven hundred and Eighty six and of the Sovereignty & Independence of the United States of America the Eleventh ,2 Signed, Sealed & | deliver'd in presence of Cha Thomson Roger Alden James Mathers Wm Sam1 Johnson [l. s.] Jonth Sturges [l. s.j REPORT OF BOARD OF TREASURY ON WESTERN LAND SALES [LC: CC Papers: no. 139, fol. 467:DS] [April 4,1787] The Board of Treasury63 to whom it was referred to Report a Plan for Selling for Public Securities, the Townships Surveyed in the Western Territory.— Beg leave to Observe, That agreeably to the Ordinance of the 20th May 1785,84 no Dis- tribution or Sale of Lands can be made until seven Ranges shall have been completely Surveyed, and a Return made of the Surveys. That the Geographer of the United States has lodged with the Board of Treasury, Surveys and Plats of Four Ranges of Townships, and fractional parts of Townships.85— That the Surveys of the said four Ranges, do not extend half thro' the same from South to North. That the Townships, and fractional parts of Townships already Surveyed, are twenty six, amounting by a Calculation of the Geog- rapher to 675,000 Acres — That one seventh part is allotted to the late Army, which is 96,428 Acres, leaving 578,572 Acres to be disposed of by the United States.— That by the Ordinance aforesaid, the Board of Treasury are to have the original Surveys and Plats entered in a Book to be kept for that purpose, and also to send Copies of the same to the several Loan Officers; which with that to be entered in the Book to be kept by the Board, will make fourteen Copies of the same Surveys and Plats, which will create more expence and delay than is probably expedient in the present state of the Public Affairs. a The deed was accepted Sept. 14, 1786 (Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 697-698). See St. Clair to Parsons with reference to the survey, Sept. 14, 1788, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 289. ■ The second Board of Treasury, consisting of Samuel Osgood, Walter Living- ston, and Arthur Lee, was created in 1784 after Robert Morris's resignation as Superintendent of Finance. All powers held by Morris during the Revolution were jointly conferred on the board, whose Secretary was William Duer. « Ante, p. 12. 45 These original plats are now in the U. S. General Land Office.
Page 25
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 25 That considering the Surveyors have already been employed two Years, it is not probable that in the course of another, they will have completely Surveyed the first seven Ranges. From the foregoing considerations it has become expedient, in the Opinion of the Board, so far to alter the Ordinance, (as to the Lands already Surveyed) as it respects to their distribution to the several States; the Sale of the same by the Commissioners of the Loan Offices, and the Inhibition of any Sale 'till seven Ranges are compleatly Surveyed. For this purpose they submit to the consideration of Congress, the following Resolves— That after the Secretary at War shall have drawn for the propor- tionate quantity of the Lands already Surveyed, which were assigned to the late Army, agreeably to the Ordinance of the 20th May 1785, the remainder shall be Advertised for Sale in one of the News Papers at least, of each of the States, for the space of four Months from the date of the Advertisement, at the expiration of which time, the Sale of the Land shall commence in the place where Congress shall sit, and continue from day to day until the same shall be disposed of; pro- vided that none of the Land shall be Sold at a less price than One Dollar per Acre, and that the Sale shall be made agreeably to the mode pointed out by the Ordinance aforesaid. That one third of the Purchase Money shall be immediately paid in any of the Public Securities of the United States to the Treasurer of the said States; and that the remaining two thirds shall be paid in like manner in three Months after the date of the Sale, on which pay- ment (a Certificate thereof being previously furnished by the Treas- urer to the Board of Treasury) Titles to the Lands shall be given to the Purchasers by the Board of Treasury, agreeably to the Terms prescribed by the said Ordinance; Provided, that if the second pay- ments shall not be made in three Months as aforesaid, the first pay- ment shall be forfeited, and the Land shall again be exposed to Sale. Ordered, That the Board of Treasury take the necessary Measures for carrying the aforesaid Resolutions into effect, and also for exhibit- ing the Surveys of the Lands. All which is humbly Submitted Samuel Osgood68 Walter Livingston67 April 4t h 1787.— [Endorsed] 59. Report—Board of Treasury plan for selling for securities the towns surveyed—Entd read—April 5,h 1787 Passed— April 21" 1787 68— M Delegate in Congress from Massachusetts, 1780-1784; first Commissioner of the Treasury, 1785-1789 (Biog. Cong. Direct., 1913, p. 900). ■ Delegate in Congress from New York, ibid., p. 813. "Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 739-740.
Page 26
26 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC : CC Papers, no. 150, vol. II, fol. 307 : LS] War Office April 16"11787 Sir I have the honor to inform Congress that I have received a letter from Colonel Harmar dated the 18th March 60 at Fort Pitt. He was then on a tour visiting the posts under his command, and was about going down the Ohio to the post at the rapids, from which, he expected to return to the Muskinghum, about the middle of May— He says "that he has had some conferences with General Butler, and from all accounts, matters seem to bear a more favorable aspect with the savages than they hitherto have done" He has also transmitted the enclosed extract of a letter from Major Wyllys who is stationed at the Rapids of the Ohio. The usurpation of the public lands by a body of armed men highly deserves the attention of Congress70 If such audacious defiance of the power of the United States be suffered with impunity a precedent will be established, to wrest all the immense property of the western territory out of the hands of the public. I have the honor to be With the highest respect Your Excellencys Most obedient Servant H Knox His Excellency The President of Congress. [Endorsed] Letter 16 April 1787 Secy at War Read 18. Referred back to the Secy at Report—inlosing an Extract from Major Wyllys—Feby 6th 178771 respecting Post S< Vincents REPORT OF THE SECRETARY AT WAR RELATIVE TO INTRUDERS ON PUBLIC LANDS [LC : CC Papers, no. 151, fol. 255 : DS] [April 19, 1787] The Secretary of the United States for the department of war to whom was referred his letter to Congress of the 16 of April72 trans- mitting an extract from Major Wyllys's letter to Lieutenant Colonel Harmar dated Rapids of the Ohio 6th February 1787 73 Reports That in his opinion the United States are more liable to be dis- appointed in their just expectations, of the great national advantages "Not found. 70 The inclosure from Major Wyllys is not printed. See report of Apr. 19, 1787, post, p. 27, and address of Americans at Vincennes, Aug. 4,1787, post, p. 65. 7 1 CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 303. The original is in Harmar Papers (1W282), Wis. Hist. Soc. "Supra. n CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 303.
Page 27
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 27 resulting from a wise administration of the western territory, by the evils of usurpation and intrusion, than by any other causes whatever. That the value of the object—The spirit of adventure—and the supposed imbecillity of government, render the dangers of usurpation on a large scale extremely imminent That if the disposition, to seize the public lands be not curbed in the first instance, in a manner demonstrative of the fixed purpose of government all future attempts to remove intruders may be abortive. Their numbers may be so great as to defy the power of the United States. Or a reluctance in the supreme authority to inflict the calamities, necessarily attendant on an abrupt and forcible removal, of men women and children from their possessions, may prevent the measure. Your Secretary therefore is of opinion, that no intrusions or usurpa- tions ought to be suffered, which the troops stationed on the Ohio are capable of preventing or removing—and that the commanding officer should be directed, to take the most efficient and immediate measures for dispossessing the party of men reported by Major Wyllys to have established themselves at St Vincents.74 On this principle the following resolve is submitted. Resolved, That the Secretary at War direct the commanding officer of the troops of the United States on the Ohio to take immediate and efficient measures for dispossessing a body of men who have in a lawless and unauthorized manner taken possession of Post Sl Vincent in defiance of the proclamations and authority of the United States, and that he employ the whole or such part of the force under his command as he shall judge necessary to effect the object. H Knox— War office 19 April 1787 [Endorsed] 19 Ap1 1787. Report of Secy at War on Intruders on West" territy Ent read 20 April 1787 passed 21, April 1787 75 THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. n, fol. 319:LS] War Office, April 26th 1787. Sir. The incessant enquiries respecting the lands due to the late army, and a conviction of the perfect dispositions of the United States » Knox to Harmar, Apr. 26, 1787, Harmar Papers (1W290), Wis. Hist. Soc. See also Harmar to Knox, Aug. 7, 1787 (Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, II, 26-30), for an account of the reception of the resolution of Congress. "The correct date is Apr. 24 (Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 740). For procla- mation of Sept. 22, 1783, prohibiting settlements on Indian lands without the consent of Congress, see Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxv, 602.
Page 28
28 TERRITORIAL PAPERS in Congress assembled, to render ample justice to their late military servants, are the reasons, and I hope will be my apology, for my pres- ent address. It is unnecessary to mention the manner in which the arrearages of pay due the late army was settled, or the present state of those arrear- ages. It is sufficient to observe, that the army were convinced, that had Congress possessed the ability, the payments would have been complete. Too many have been compelled, by their necessities, to sell the evidences of their public debt, for a small proportion of the nominal sum. These unfortunate men now consider the lands prom- ised them, as their only resource against poverty, in old age, and there- fore are extremely solicitous to receive, immediately, their dues in this respect.—Uninformed of, or not comprehending the cause which prevent a delivery, they pine and murmur at a four years delay. It is presumed the quantity of land due the army will not be much less than three millions of acres. Their proportion of the quantity already surveyed, may amount to about 100,000 acres. Assuming the surveys of the last year, as a data, or even supposing double the quantity will be surveyed annually in future, yet a very long period must elapse before the whole quantity due will be delivered. A period, at which very few of those entitled to the land will be living. The present object of this letter is to respectfully submit to Con- gress, the consideration of the propriety of assigning a part of land, bounded on the Ohio, and by some rivers which empty into the same, sufficiently extensive to satisfy the claims of the late army, and to direct some effectual mode free of expence by which individuals may receive their right. In any plan for the disposal of the western territory, if a tract for the army be not assigned, they will be prevented from the benefits intended by Congress. Circumstanced as they are generally, they cannot enter into competition with rich speculators; which in some degree must be the case, if they shall not have a particular tract assigned to them, and surveyed in the most regular manner.76 I have the honor to be sir, with the most perfect respect, Your Excellencys Most Obedient Servant H KNOX His Excellency, The President of Congress [Endorsed] Letter 26 April 1787 SeC at War Read 26.th May Referred to Mr Carrington Mr King Mr Dane Mr Madison Mr Benson Acted on Octr 22d 1787 78 See land ordinance of May 20, 1785, ante, p. 12. "Post, p. 76.
Page 29
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 29 MEMORIAL OF SAMUEL H. PARSONS 78 AND ASSOCIATES [LC:CC Papers, no. 41, vol. vni, fol. 226:ADS] [May 8, 1787] To The United States in Congress assembled The Memorial of the Associators for the purchase of Lands North West of the River Ohio by their Agent Samuel Holden Parsons Sheweth. that many of your Memorialists were Officers & Soldiers of the late federal Army, who by Resolves of Congress are intitled to a grant of Lands; and others are public Creditors who are desirous of a Satisfaction of their Debts in the federal Lands, and for that purpose have associated for purchasing and Settling a Tract of Country in the ungranted Lands of the United States under the Direction & Govern- ment of Congress They therefore pray that a Tract of Country within the Western Territory of the United States at some convenient Place may be granted them at a reasonable Price, upon their paying a Sum not exceeding One Million of Dollars nor less than five Hundred Thousand Dollars,79 and that Such of the Associators as by the Resolutions of Congress are intitled to receive Lands for their military Services may have their Lands assignd them within the aforesaid Grant and as in Duty bound your Memorialists will pray &° Dated in New York the 8hof May 178780 Sam H. Parsons [Endorsed] N° 51—Memorial—Sam1 H. Parsons Agent of the As- sociators for the purchase of Lands on the Ohio—Read May 9 th 1787 referred—Mr Carrington Mr King—Mr Dane—Mr Madison Mr Benson—Acted on July 23d 1787—see comm" book81— 78 An original director of the Ohio Company, and commissioner to the western Indians, 1785-1786; one of the negotiators of the treaty of Fort Finney. In 1787 he was appointed a judge of the Territorial Court, his service terminating with his accidental death in 1789 (Hall, Life and Letters S. H. Parsons, passim). 79 Cf. proposals of July 21, 1787, post, p. 52. 80 The text of the original records of the Ohio Company is printed in Hulbert, Recs. Ohio Co., vols. I and II, passim. * See Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 755-756, 760-761. The manuscript Journals contain no additional references.
Page 30
30 TERRITORIAL PAPERS PROPOSITION OF THOMAS HUTCHINS82 FOR SURVEY OF WESTERN LANDS [LC:CC Papers, no. 138, vol. I, fol. 617:C] [June 29, 1787] Memorandum From the Muskingum to the Mouth of the Ohio is 1.100. Miles Length of the Wabash is ... 650 Great Miami .... 260 Little Miami .... 150 Sioto 200 Hockhocking .... 140 2.500 3 Dollars . . . .7.500 For the above number of Dollars, The Honorable Commissioners of the Board of Treasury, shall be furnished in the course of a few Months free from all other expence (the Geographers Salary excepted) with a plan of the above mentioned Rivers accompanied with an Account of their Navigation and a general description of the Soil, Timber &c. of the Country through which they run.— In making the necessary Surveys, which shall be on Oath—pro- tection to be given by the Troops if required.— signed Tho: Hutchins— Compard with the Original in the Office of the Board of Treasury. Wm Duer Secy 83 29"1 June 1787 [Endorsed] Propositions of Thomas Hutchins Esq June 29. 1787. Copy— 82 Hutchins became Geographer of the United States in 1781. His earlier interest in engineering is reflected in his maps of the West, which mark an advance in general knowledge of that region. From 1784 to 1789 he was engaged in surveying the lands northwest of the Ohio (Hutchins, Topographical Descrip- tion, Hicks, ed., intro.; Diet. Amer. Biog., IX, 435-436, art. by F. C. Hicks). 83 Appointed Secretary of the Board of Treasury in 1786. In 1789 he became Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under Hamilton. For his interest in army contracts and in land speculation, see Diet. Amer. Biog., V, 486-487, art. by C. M. Fuess.
Page 31
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 31 REPORT OF THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 151, fol. 259:LS] [July 10, 1787] The Secretary of the United States for the department of war to whom was referr'd sundry papers and letters respecting the hostili- ties on the frontiers of Virginia Reports That the frontiers of Virginia bordering on the Ohio have been in the course of the present year and probably still are involved in the greatest distress, by parties of hostile indians who plunder and murder the inhabitants That the facts are authenticated by the letters and papers trans- mitted by the Executive of Virginia84 the letter of John Cleve Symmes Esqr,85 and the letter of the commanding officer of the troops,89 all of which accompany this report That from the representations contained in the aforesaid letters and other information prior thereto, it appears most probable that the depredations have been committed by the Shawanoese and the Wabash indians. That the measures necessary to put a stop to said enormities and effectually to prevent them in future demand the most serious attention of the United States.— But your Secretary apprehends that the deep rooted prejudices, and malignity of heart, and conduct, reciprocally entertained and practised on all occasions by the Whites and Savages will ever pre- vent their being good neighbours. The one side anxiously defend their lands which the other avariciously claim. With minds pre- viously inflamed the slighest offence occasions death—revenge follows which knows no bounds. The flames of a merciless war are thus lighted up which involve the innocent and helpless with the guilty. Either one or the other party must remove to a greater distance, or Government must keep them both in awe by a strong hand, and compel them to be moderate and just. The right that each party assumes of being judges and prompt executioners in their own cause prevents all effectual interference, excepting by a legal coercive power, which shall make the necessary sacrifices to Justice, let them belong to which side they may. But the small corps of troops on the Ohio would feebly support such a system, even were it not to interfere in its execution with the state governments. M For the state of the frontiers bordering on the Ohio River, see letters from various officers in Kentucky to Governor Randolph, Cal. Va. State Papers, IV, 266-268, 277, 278, 284-285, 286-287, 295-296. M Not found. » From Colonel Harmar, May 14, 1787 (Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, II, 19-22).
Page 32
32 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The number of the troops are about five hundred. These are employed in garrisons and in the field to prevent intrusions on the public lands; to cover the surveyors and to protect the inhabitants of the frontiers. One third of the force is employed directly for the latter object. For which purpose one company is stationed at Venango, part of a company at Fort Mcintosh and two companies at the falls of the Ohio. But besides these detachments, the troops protecting the surveyors, and preventing usurpations, have the effect, to cover a very large district of country south of the Ohio, from the depredations of the Savages.— But as the surveys appear to be nearly suspended; and as it is probable that Congress may sell the country in a body from the seven ranges already surveyed to the river Scioto; the disposition of the troops may with propriety be changed, so as more immediately, to conform to the protection of the inhabitants. In the opinion of your Secretary the complete protection of the frontiers, and the other objects of the United States in the western territory, would require a body of fifteen hundred men.—For the want thereof, the public designs and interests languish—The Subjects of Spain have been plundered—And the whole western territory, is liable to be wrested out of the hands of the Union, by lawless adven- turers, or by the savages whose imperfect perceptions render them unable to distinguish between the aforesaid description of persons, and the regular authority of the United States Were it practicable to raise and maintain such a body of troops, a chain of posts might be establish[d], which at once would awe the savages, cover the surveyors and prevent intrusions—The Chain to commence with a small garrison at Fort Pitt—to be connected by others established at Le Boeuf at the head of French Creek—thence a portage of twelve miles over to Presqu' Isle on Lake Erie—at Presqu' Isle—at Cayahoga or the mouth of Sandusky Lake whichever on examination should be found to be best calculated to secure boats and shipping—at the mouth of the Miami emptying into Lake Erie— The Miami Village, at the head of the River, a strong post of two hundred and fifty or three hundred men—The head of the Wabash— Post Sl Vincents on the Wabash—The mouth of the Wabash—The mouth of the Ohio—This post would serve as well to curb the pro- fessed designs of the lawless, against our Spanish allies, as to evince to the world the dispositions and power of the United States to govern and control their own citizens—The chain would be continued from the mouth of the Ohio to Fort Pitt by small garrisons, at proper intervals, in order to prevent intrusions on the public lands
Page 33
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 33 But however dignified and important to the character and interests of the United States such a body of troops might be, it is to be re- gretted that the depressed state of the finances will not admit of the measure—It remains only therefore, that the troops actually in service on the Ohio, be so posted and ordered, as best to restrain the incursions of the savages and prevent usurpations of the public lands. Your Secretary submits the following general disposition of the troops, giving however at all times full permission to the commanding officer, to make such changes, and alterations therein, as he shall judge the good of the service may require. The tribes of indians who inhabit the south western and eastern parts of Lake Erie, seem peaceably inclined. The Shawanoes who were expelled from the Scioto last autumn, have removd to White Creek on the Wabash, and join'd the Wabash indians in their hostili- ties on the inhabitants of Kentucky—The greater part of the troops should therefore be advanced further down the Ohio—Small garrisons to be retained at Venango Fort Pitt and Fort M°Intosh—One com- pany at Muskinghum part of which to be posted high up on the river— One company high up the Miami and a small post at its mouth— Three companies to be establish'd at Sl Vincents on the Wabash— The remaining troops amounting to two companies and upwards to be stationed at the post already established at the rapids in order as well to cover the settlements, as to afford succour to any post that may want it. A strong post being established at Sl Vincents will probably either curb the hostile indians, or induce them to remove to a greater dis- tance, or incline them to peace. In addition to this arrangement it will be necessary that a treaty be held at Sl Vincents with Shawanoes and other Wabash indians in order to effect a peace—This business would particularly belong to the superintendant—But as the misfortune of breaking his leg will prob- ably incapacitate him for the present,87 if so, the business might with propriety be delegated to the commanding officer of the troops—That he should be empowered to make peace with the said indians on the terms prescribed to him by Congress—That he should also be em- powered to maintain the said peace as far as the authority or interests of the United States should be concerned—That for this purpose he should have the power to confine and try all persons who should within the jurisdiction and territory of the United States injure or kill any of the indians or otherwise infract the treaty » Capt. Walter Finney to Harmar, Apr. 19, 1787, Harmar Papers (1W289), Wis. Hist. Soc. 1MMO-34 1
Page 34
34 TERRITORIAL PAPERS That such presents as Congress shall direct for the treaty be pro- vided by the board of treasury— That if after proper efforts a peace with the indians could not be obtained by reason of their wicked and blood thirsty dispositions the commanding officer should endevor by force to expel them from their towns or extirpate them. That for this purpose he should collect the whole of his force except- ing small garrisons for the respective posts.—That he should have power to call upon the district of Kentucky and the frontier counties of Pennsylvania for a sufficient force for such time as would be neces- sary to effect his object, provided that the force so required should not exceed one thousand men from the counties of Virginia and five hundred from those of Pennsylvania. That the commanding officer of the troops of the United States should have the sole direction and command of the expedition. And that the expences thereof should be borne by the Union— That the Board of Treasury should concur with the Secretary at War in providing the rations, means of transportation and other supplies which should be necessary for such an expedition That the pay of the militia so called into service should be the same as the pay of the regular troops That the States of Virginia and Pennsylvania should pay their respective militia and that the same should be allowed to the said states out of the requisitions of [blank] provided however that no charge for pay rolls for said service be valid unless the said pay rolls be corroborated and supported by actual musters of said militia made by the inspector or by a field officer of the troops of the United States agreeably to the orders of the commanding officer In the present embarrassed state of public affairs and entire de- ficiency of funds an indian war of any considerable extent and dura- tion would most exceedingly distress the United States—The great distance by land which the stores and supplies must be transported would render the expences intolerable If in the event it should be found necessary to commence with an attack on the Wabash indians it will be very difficult if not impracti- cable to prevent the other tribes from joining them. The Officers or traders at the British posts would use every art and intrigue for that purpose The expedients herein proposed of posting the troops so as to awe the savages and endevoring by treaties and presents to incline them to peace are the most rational that can be devised by your Secretary An attempt to treat appears to be indispensible even if a war should be the result as at present the disputes between the indians
Page 35
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 35 and whites seem to be involved in such a reciprocity of injuries and murders that it may be difficult for the public to judge impartially which is in the wrong—It will be necessary to examine before we strike—Whenever the United States declare war it is to be hoped that it will be a war founded on the immutable principles of Justice All which is humbly submitted H Knox War Office July 10.1787 [Endorsed] 10 July 1787 Report of Secy at War touching Indian hostilities Entd Read 11 July 1787 Order of the day for 15th— July 18. 1787 Referred to Mr Dane Hawkins Mr Smith Mr Kean Mr Carrington88 "See resolution of Congress, July 21, 1787, post, p. 50, and report of commit- tee, July 26, 1787, post, p. 56.
Page 36
Blank page
End of Section 1. Continue to next section or 
Section 2
Page 37
PART TWO Papers relating to the Period of the First Stage of the Government of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio 1787-1791
Page 38
Blank page
Page 39
PART TWO ORDINANCE OF 1787 [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [July 13, 1787] An Ordinance for the government of the territory of the United States North west of the river Ohio.1 Be it ordained by the United States in Congress Assembled that the said territory for the purposes of temporary government be one dis- trict, subject however to be divided into two districts as future cir- cumstances may in the opinion of Congress make it expedient Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, that the estates both of resident and non resident proprietors in the said territory dying intes- tate shall descend to and be distributed among their children and the descendants of a deceased child in equal parts; the descendants of a deceased child or grand child to take the share of their deceased parent in equal parts among them; and where there shall be no children or de- scendants then in equal parts to the next of kin in equal degree—and among collaterals the children of a deceased brother or sister of the intestate shall have in equal parts among them their deceased parent's share [& there shall in no case be a distinction between kindred of the 1 To the compiler of the legislative history of the ordinance it is evident that the Journals of Congress contribute a broken record. In order to follow the various stages in the evolution of the substantive principles which became a part of this instrument, it is necessary to combine the various entries in the Journals with the endorsements on the reports of the different committees which succes- sively reported to Congress, beginning as early as Dec. 8, 1784. The resolutions of Oct. 10, 1780, and the ordinance of Apr. 23, 1784, did little more than evolve certain principles, some of a permanent nature, others of an impractical and con- sequently an impermanent character. Yet the states were yielding up their claims to western lands in accordance with the provisions of those enactments (see cessions of Virginia and New York, ante, pp. 6, 3). Delegates in Congress were therefore early convinced of the necessity of revamping the inoperative instrument of 1784 and of inducing the states of Virginia and Massachusetts to alter their deeds of cession based thereon. Throughout the period of discussion in Congress it is also plain that the state of affairs among the inhabitants of the Illinois country and on the Wabash was equally in the minds of delegates. Pressure from these quarters for a stable government and for a confirmation of ancient rights and privileges was a significant factor in promoting an early reconsideration of the whole issue of territorial organization and in hastening its conclusion. See memorial of Carbonneaux, Dec. 8, 1784 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 455), first re- ported upon Feb. 15, 1785 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxviu, 67-68), followed 39
Page 40
40 TERRITORIAL PAPERS whole & half blood ;2] saving in all cases to the widow of the intestate her third part of the real estate for life, and one third part of the personal estate: and this law relative to descents and dower shall remain in full force until altered by the legislature of the district. And until the governor & judges shall adopt laws as herein after mentioned estates in the said territory may be devised or bequeathed by wills in writing signed and sealed by him or her in whom the estate may be, [being of full age,3] and attested by three witnesses, and real estates may be con- veyed by lease and release or bargain and sale signed, sealed and delivered by the person being of full age in whom the estate may be and attested by two witnesses provided such wills be duly proved and such conveyances be acknowledged or the execution thereof duly proved and be recorded within one year after proper magistrates, courts and registers shall be appointed for that purpose and personal property may be transferred by delivery 4 saving however to the french and canadian inhabitants & other settlers of the Kaskaskies, Saint Vincents and the neighbouring villages who have heretofore professed themselves citizens of Virginia, their laws and customs now in force among them relative to the descent & conveyance of property 5 by reports of May 10,1786 (CC Papers, no. 190, Comm. Bk. Entry), Aug. 23,1786, and May 7, 1787, loe. cti. On July 9 the report was referred to a new committee (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 97) which revamped the whole instrument. Nine broadsides of the ordinance, in various stages, are found among the CC Papers, Library of Congress, distributed as follows: four (corrected drafts) between Apr. 26 and May 9, one of July 11 (with the anti-slavery clause attached), and four of July 13, with corrections to date, signed by Charles Thomson, Secre- tary of Congress. There is also a copy of the edition of July 13 in SD Archives (Terr. Papers, N. W. Terr., vol. I). In the register of incidental accounts, 1785-1789 (CC Papers, vol. 146), appears an item for 100 copies, rendered by John Dunlap, printer. A comparison of this first official printed version with the Journals text reveals many variations: in punctuation alone there are over 140 differences. For an illustration of the significance of this discrepancy see post, p. 42, n. 14. » An amendment to the report of July 11, 1787 (CC Papers, broadsides). The brackets are editorial. * In parentheses in the printed copy; the brackets are editorial. 4 The provision in regard to descent and conveyance of property had been first suggested in the Johnson report of Apr. 26,1787 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 109), and when it appears in amplified form in the report of July 11 (ibid., broadsides) it closely resembles the Massachusetts law of Feb. 6,1784 (Mass. Laws, 1780-1807, I,109-110), saving the stipulation in the latter that the eldest son should receive two shares. See also the Virginia statute of 1785, Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), xi, 138-140. 6 Although this assurance to the former subjects of France and Great Britain is not found in any of the drafts prior to the printed report of July 11, 1787, it was compounded from numerous committee reports in response to appeals from the inhabitants (see ante, p. 8, n. 18; committee reports of May 5 and June 20, 1788, post, pp. 105,112; and instructions to Governor St. Clair, Aug. 29,1788, post, p. 146). The clause gave effect to one of the conditions in the Virginia act of cession, Mar. 1, 1784. ante, p. 6 (see also Moore v. Hill, 1 111. 236, 238). But the provi-
Page 41
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 41 Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid that there shall be ap- pointed from time to time by Congress a governor,6 whose commission shall continue in force for the term of three years, unless sooner revoked by Congress: he shall reside in the district and have a free- hold estate therein, in one thousand acres of land while in the exercise of his office.7 There8 shall be appointed from time to time by Con- gress a secretary,9 whose commission shall continue in force for four years, unless sooner revoked: he shall reside in the district and have a freehold estate therein in five hundred acres of land while in the exercise of his office; It shall be his duty to keep and preserve the acts and laws passed by the legislature and the public records of the district and the proceedings of the governor in his executive depart- ment and transmit authentic copies of such acts & proceedings every six months to the Secretary of Congress.10 There shall also be ap- pointed a court to consist of three judges any two of whom to form a court," who shall have a common law jurisdiction 12 and reside in the sion was permissive and not mandatory, so far as the individual was concerned (Lavelle v. Strobel, 89 111. 370, 380). The principle is an inheritance of the policy of Great Britain, as illustrated by her legislation of 1774 (Quebec Act, Docs. tel. Const. Hist. Can., 1759-1791, 1907 ed., pp. 401-405), and by the opinions of her judges, which guaranteed the inhabitants of conquered territories in the right to be governed by their own customary laws (see opinion of Lord Mansfield in Campbell v. Hall, rendered in 1774, ibid., pp. 366-372). It was in fact an ac- cepted international principle. See also the proclamation of Governor St. Clair, May 5, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, m, 306. • Cf. ordinance of 1784, wherein the temporary organization of the district should be made by its inhabitants {Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxvi, 276). 7 The qualification of a freehold estate for territorial officials was inserted in the last revision, July 11. It is not found in the draft of July 9 nor in earlier reports. 8 A new paragraph in the printed copy. * Under the act of Aug. 7, 1789, post, p. 203, all the powers of the Governor devolved upon the Secretary during the Governor's absence. 10 See Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 261 et seq., and act of Aug. 7, 1789, post, p. 203; see also Sargent to the President, Jan. 2, 1790, post, p. 229. 11 In Monroe's report of May 10, 1786 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 85), provision was made for five judges. This was changed in the report of the Johnson commit- tee, Apr. 26, 1787 (ibid., fol. 109), to a court of three members, which became permanent, with the exception of the modifying act of May 8, 1792, post, p. 395, wherein one judge was authorized to hold a court. In 1801 Indiana Territory passed an act declaring two judges necessary (Philbrick, ed., Laws Ind. Terr., IHC, xxi, 8), which was repealed two years later, ibid., p. 85. u The common law of England was given force in the territory by action of the Governor and Judges, July 15, 1795, effective Oct. 1, 1795 (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvii, 253). The absence of equity jurisdiction was viewed as a defect (Judges Symmes and Turner to Sargent, Aug. 22, 1790, post, p. 303; Philbrick, ed., op. cit., p. cbriV), and in a committee report to the House of Repre- sentatives, Dec. 29, 1803 (Annals, 8 Cong., 1 sess., 792), a recommendation was made that the equity powers of judges of the United States be extended to territorial judges. The additional powers thus recommended were conferred by the act of Mar. 3, 1805 (2 Stat. 338).
Page 42
42 TERRITORIAL PAPERS district and have each therein a freehold estate in five hundred acres of land while in the exercise of their offices, and their commissions shall continue in force during good behaviour.13 The governor, and judges or a majority of them 14 shall adopt and publish in the district such laws of the original states criminal and civil as may be necessary and best suited to the circumstances of the 13 Since there was no supreme court in the confederated government there was naturally no provision in the ordinance for appeals from the territorial supreme court. But it should be noted that after the adoption of the Federal Con- stitution and the formal reenactment of the ordinance (Aug. 7, 1789, post, p. 203), Congress failed to authorize writs of error so far as the territory was concerned, so that the Supreme Court of the United States was unable to hear appeals from territorial courts. See Clarke v. Bazadone (1 Cranch, 212-214). The Governor of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio called attention to the desirability of a change as early as 1794 in a letter to the Secretary of State (Dec. 14, 1794, Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, II, 332-333, erroneously captioned as to Jefferson), but nearly ten years later a committee of the House of Representatives reported against the proposed change (Annals, 8 Cong., 2 sess., 1577-1579). In 1805, however, this defect in territorial organization was remedied (2 Stat. 338). Con- cerning the status of territorial courts, thus originated and subsequently extended to other territories, see American Insurance Co. r. Canter (1 Peters, 511-545), wherein such courts are described as "legislative courts" and not "constitu- tional courts, in which the judicial power conferred ... on the general government, can be deposited." Similarly, see Benner v. Porter (9 Howard, 235) and Clinton r. Englebrecht (13 Wallace, 441-447). 14 In the official printed copies of the ordinance, signed by Charles Thomson as Secretary of Congress, there appear certain variations in punctuation from the original Journals which were sufficient to leave the meaning of the former in doubt. The most significant of these differences occur in connection with the above sentence. In the printed copies no comma appears after the word "gov- ernor", as in the Journal; on the other hand, a comma is inserted after the word "judges", and after the word "them". In a contemporary manuscript copy (CC Papers, no. 175, fol. 123) the comma is likewise omitted after "governor". The punctuation in the printed copies, which were in the hands of territorial officials, provoked serious differences of opinion between Governor and Judges as to their respective legislative powers (see Judges Parsons and Varnum to St. Clair, July 30 and Aug. 2,1788, St. Clair Papers, OSL; St. Clair to Parsons and Varnum, Aug. 2,1788, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 273; Thomson to Sargent, Mar. 11, 1789, post, p. 189; and St. Clair to the President of the U.S., August, 1789, post, p. 206). That the Journal itself may have been in error is not impossible, since in all the drafts from that of Apr. 26, 1787, the punctuation is the same as found in the official printed copy issued after final passage. If we wish to conclude that the error was in the Journal text, it may be accounted for by Thomson's well- known carelessness in his later career. It is noteworthy that the number of punctuation differences between the printed text and the manuscript Journal become fewer after Thomson relinquished to Bankson the task of transcribing the ordinance, at approximately the half-way point. The disparities noted in Thom- son's hand are over 130, as against thirteen in Bankson's. Nevertheless, the Journal is the final authority: we cannot go behind it. It may be further noted that the printed texts of the ordinance from 1787 to the present time have universally followed the version of the first official printed copy.
Page 43
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 43 district15 and report them to Congress from time to time, which laws shall be in force in the district until the organization of the general assembly therein, unless disapproved of by Congress; but afterwards the legislature shall have authority to alter them as they shall think fit.18 The governor for the time being shall be Commander in chief of the Militia, appoint and commission all officers in the same below the rank of general officers: All general officers shall be appointed & com- missioned by Congress.17 Previous to the organization of the general Assembly the governor shall appoint such magistrates and other civil officers in each county or township, as he shall find necessary for the preservation of the peace and good order in the same. After the general assembly shall be organ- ized, the powers and duties of magistrates and other civil officers shall be regulated and defined by the said Assembly; but all magis- trates and other civil officers, not herein otherwise directed shall dur- u In the unrevised report of Apr. 26, 1787, occur the following words: "That the judges shall agree on the criminal laws of some one state, in their opinion the most perfect. . . ." In the revised report of the same date the language in the above text was substituted. The same provision was later extended to the gov- ernments of the Territory South of the River Ohio (1792) and the territories of Mississippi (1798), Indiana (1800), Michigan (1805), and Illinois (1809). For differences of opinion between Governor and Judges as to the meaning of the term "law", as here used, see their correspondence, July 29-31, Aug. 2, 1788, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 26Setseq., and June, 1795, printed in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 353-367. See also Governor St. Clair to the Attorney General, [December] 1790, ibid., pp. 163-164. It was at one time the opinion of the House of Representatives that laws "enacted" rather than "adopted " by the Territory, during the first stage, were invalid. See committee report of May 24, 1794 (A.S.P., Misc., I, 82), and the action of the House in the passage of a joint resolution invalidating all the laws, except one, passed in the year 1792 {Annals, 3 Cong., 2 sess., 1227). The Senate refused to concur, ibid., p. 830. See in this connection, Governor St. Clair to the Judges, June, 1795, Smith (ed.), op. cit., pp. 336-357. Relevant to the same question is the case of the Bank of Michigan v. Williams, involving the right of the Governor and Judges of the territory of Michigan to enact rather than to adopt laws. The courts of New York, where the issue was tried, uniformly held that a law "enacted" by the legislative body of the first stage of territorial government was not in contravention of the provisions of the ordinance of 1787 (5 Wendell, 480, 539). This is the only instance in which the question came squarely before any court. "By an act of May 8,1792, post, p. 395, the Governor and Judges were empow- ered to repeal territorial laws. Provision was made in the same act for the print- ing of the territorial laws. 17 The ordinance was in effect amended shortly by a considerable augmentation of the Governor's administrative duties. By resolution on Oct. 3, 1787, Con- gress provided for a union of the duties of the superintendent of Indian affairs for the northern district with those of the Governor, effective Aug. 12, 1788 (Jour- nals Amer. Cong., iv, 785).
Page 44
44 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ing the continuance of this temporary government be appointed by the governor.18 For the prevention of crimes and injuries the laws to be adopted or made shall have force in all parts of the district and for the execution of process criminal and civil, the governor shall make proper divisions thereof, and he shall proceed from time to time as circumstances may require to lay out the parts of the district in which the indian titles shall have been extinguished into counties and townships subject how- ever to such alterations as may thereafter be made by the legislature 19 So soon as there shall be five thousand free male inhabitants of full age in the district upon giving proof thereof to the governor,20 they shall receive authority with time and place to elect representatives from their counties or townships to represent them in the general assembly, provided that for every five hundred free male inhabitants there shall be one representative and so on progressively with the num- ber of free male inhabitants shall the right of representation encrease until the number of representatives shall amount to twenty five after which the number and proportion of representatives shall be regulated by the legislature; provided that no person be eligible or qualified to act as a representative unless he shall have been a citizen of one of the United States three years and be a resident in the district or unless he shall have resided in the district three years and in either case shall likewise hold in his own right in fee simple two hundred acres of land within the same; provided also that a freehold in fifty acres of land in the district having been a citizen of one of the states and being resident in the district; or the like freehold and two years residence in the dis- trict shall be necessary to qualify a man as an elector of a representa- tive The representatives thus elected shall serve for the term of two years and in case of the death of a representative or removal from office, the governor shall issue a writ to the county or township for which he was a member, to elect another in his stead to serve for the residue of the term The general assembly or legislature shall consist of the governor, legislative council and a house of representatives. The legislative council shall consist of five members to continue in Office five years unless sooner removed by Congress any three of whom to be a quorum and the members of the council shall be nominated and appointed in the following manner, to wit; as soon as representatives shall be elected the governor shall appoint a time & place for them to meet together, 18 The power of Congress, and subsequently of the President, with the estab- lishment of the National Government, to appoint the supreme judges in the terri- tory is implied (the Attorney General to the President, Feb. 2,1802, post, ill, 208). "For analysis of this paragraph, see loc. ext. See also Worthington to the Sec- retary of the Treasury, August, 1801, post, in, 171. M Cf. ordinance of 1784, Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvi, 276.
Page 45
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 45 and when met they shall nominate ten persons residents in the district and each possessed of a freehold in five hundred acres of Land and re- turn their names to Congress; five of whom Congress shall appoint & commission to serve as aforesaid; and whenever a vacancy shall hap- pen in the council by death or removal from office, the house of!1Repre- sentatives shall nominate two persons qualified as aforesaid, for each vacancy, and return their names to Congress; one of whom Congress shall appoint and commission for the residue of the term; and every five* years, four Months at least before the expiration of the time of service of the Members of Council, the said house shall nominate ten persons qualified as aforesaid, and return their names to Congress, five of whom Congress shall appoint and commission to serve as Members of the Council five years, unless sooner removed. And the Governor, legislative Council, and house of Representatives, shall have authority to make laws in all cases for the good government of the district, not repugnant to the principles and Articles in this Ordinance established and declared. And all bills having passed by a majority in the house, and by a Majority in the Council, shall be referred to the Governor for his assent; but no bill or legislative Act whatever, shall be of any force without his assent. The Governor shall have power to convene, pro- rogue and dissolve the General Assembly, when in his opinion it shall be expedient— The Governor, Judges, legislative Council, Secretary, and such other Officers as Congress shall appoint in the district, shall take an Oath or Affirmation of fidelity, and of Office, the Governor before the President of Congress, and all other Offices before the Governor. As soon as a legislature shall be formed in the district, the Council and house assembled in one room, shall have authority by joint ballot to elect a Delegate to Congress, who shall have a seat in Congress, with a right of debating, but not of voting, during this temporary Government.22 And for extending the fundamental principles of Civil and religious liberty, which form the basis whereon these Republics, their laws and constitutions are erected; to fix and establish those principles as the basis of all laws, constitutions and governments, which forever here- after shall be formed in the said territory; —to provide also for the establishment of States, and permanent government therein, and for their admission to a share in the federal Councils on an equal footing with the original States, at as early periods as may be consistent with the general interest— u The handwriting changes at this point from that of Secretary Thomson to that of Benjamin Bankson, Jr., first clerk in the Secretary's office. "This half privilege accorded the territorial delegate is found in Jefferson's draft of Mar. 1, 1784 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., XXVI, 119), and in Monroe's draft of May 10, 1786 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 85), but drops out of succeeding drafts until the final revision of July 11, 1787 (CC Papers, broadsides).
Page 46
46 TERRITORIAL PAPERS It is hereby Ordained and declared by the authority aforesaid, That the following Articles shall be considered as Articles of compact be- tween the Original States and the People and States in the said terri- tory, and forever remain unalterable, unless by common consent, to wit,23 Article the First. No person demeaning himself in a peaceable and orderly manner shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship or religious sentiments in the said territory— Article the Second. The Inhabitants of the said territory shall always be entitled to the benefits of the writ of habeas corpus, and of the trial by Jury; of a proportionate representation of the people in the legislature, and of judicial proceedings according to the course of the common law; all Persons shall be bailable unless for capital offen- ces, where the proof shall be evident, or the presumption great; all fines shall be moderate, and no cruel or unusual punishments shall be inflicted; no man shall be deprived of his liberty or property but by the judgment of his Peers, or the law of the land; and should the pub- lic exigencies make it necessary for the common preservation to take any persons property, or to demand his particular services, full com- pensation shall be made for the same;—and in the just preservation of rights and property it is understood and declared, that no law ought ever to be made, or have force in the said territory, that shall in any manner whatever interfere with, or affect private contracts or engage- ments, bona fide and without fraud previously formed24 23 The various articles of the compact were, in the main, adapted from existing state constitutions and bills of rights. The provisions relating to habeas corpus and trial by jury are embodied in the report of Sept. 19, 1786 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 101), and the idea of a compact between the Federal Government and the ter- ritories goes back to the ordinance of 1784 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxvi, 278). The section as a whole, however, was embodied for the first time in the printed report of July 11, 1787. 24 This principle had not heretofore appeared in any state or other organic act in the United States. It was inserted in the final draft of the ordinance without having been mentioned in any previous reports by the various committees asso- ciated with the formation of that instrument. But on May 15, 1787, Richard Henry Lee, a member of the committee of Congress which gave the ordinance its last revision, wrote to George Mason concerning the necessity of prohibiting the states from making paper money a legal tender (Ballagh, ed., Letters K. H. Lee, II, 421-422). Again on July 15, two days after the passage of the ordinance, Lee wrote to Washington that Congress had concluded its work in establishing a temporary government beyond the Ohio, and observes: "It seemed necessary, for the security of property among uninformed, and perhaps licentious people . . . that a strong toned government should exist, and the rights of property be clearly defined " (ibid., p. 425). Six weeks later, in the Federal Convention, when the question of prohibiting the states from making paper money a legal tender was under discussion, "King of Massachusetts moved to add, in the words used in the Ordinance of Cong' establishing new States, a prohibition on the States to interfere in private contracts" (Tansill, ed., Docs. Illus. Formation Union, p. 628).
Page 47
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 47 Article the Third. Religion, Morality and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, Schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged25 The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the Indians; their lands and property shall never be taken from them without their consent; and in their property, rights and liberty, they never shall be invaded or disturbed, unless in just and lawful wars authorised by Congress; but laws founded in justice and humanity shall from time to time be made, for preventing wrongs being done to them, and for preserving peace and friendship with them— Article the Fourth. The said territory, and the States which may be formed therein, shall forever remain a part of this Confederacy of the United States of America,26 subject to the Articles of Confedera- tion, and to such alterations therein as shall be constitutionally made; and to all the Acts and Ordinances of the United States in Congress Assembled, conformable thereto. The Inhabitants and Settlers in the said territory, shall be subject to pay a part of the federal debts con- tracted or to be contracted, and a proportional part of the expences of Government, to be apportioned on them by Congress, according to the same common rule and measure by which apportionments thereof shall be made on the other States; and the taxes for paying their propor- tion, shall be laid and levied by the authority and direction of the legislatures of the district or districts or new States, as in the original States, within the time agreed upon by the United States in Congress Assembled. The Legislatures of those districts, or new States, Ishall never interfere with the primary disposal of the Soil by the United States in Congress Assembled, nor with any regulations Congress may The desire to forestall at the outset a recurrence in the proposed new states of the social disorders which revolved about the paper-money issue, and contracts, its concomitant, is the obvious explanation for the insertion of the clause in the ordi- nance. Another explanation has been suggested to the effect that the Ohio Com- pany, whose proposal for a grant of land was then pending, desired protection against any law that would interfere with the pyramid of contracts which the company was proposing to erect in order to dispose of its large estate. See W. P. Cutler, "Private Contract Provision in the Northwest Ordinance of 1787", Mag. Amer. Hist., XXII, 483-486. See also Governor St. Clair to Judges Parsons and Varnum, July 29,1788 (Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, n, 66), in which the Governor declared against the competency of the legislature to alter the terms of the charter of a corporation. Such action was held to be "at variance with the spirit of the Ordinance of Congress." "In the report of July 11 a provision "and all persons while young shall be taught some useful occupation" is crossed out. "Whether general laws of Congress (e. g., excise laws) were applicable to the territories unless the latter were specifically mentioned, as in the constitutional relations of Great Britain and the American colonies prior to the separation, became an issue in 1795. See opinion of the Attorney General, June 19, 1795, post, p. 520, and Governor St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, July 24 and Dec. 3, 1795, Smith (ed.), op. tit., pp. 378-383.
Page 48
48 TERRITORIAL PAPERS find necessary for securing the title in such soil to the bona fide pur- chasers: No tax shall be imposed on lands the property of the United States; and in no case shall non Resident proprietors be taxed higher than Residents.27 The navigable Waters leading into the Missisippi and St Lawrence, and the carrying places between the same shall be common highways, and forever free, as well to the Inhabitants of the said territory, as to the Citizens of the United States, and those of any other States that may be admitted into the Confederacy, without any tax, impost or duty therefor28— Article the Fifth. There shall be formed in the said territory, not less than three nor more than five States;29 and the boundaries of the States, as soon as Virginia shall alter her act of Cession and consent to the same,30 shall become fixed and established as follows, to wit: The Western State in the said territory, shall be bounded by the Missisippi, the Ohio and Wabash Rivers; a direct line drawn from the Wabash and post Vincents due North to the territorial line be- tween the United States and Canada, and by the said territorial line to the lake of the Woods and Missisippi. The middle State shall be bounded by the said direct line, the Wabash from post Vincents to the Ohio; by the Ohio, by a direct line drawn due North from the mouth 27 The foregoing principles are based on the ordinance of 1784 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxvi, 276-278), saving the additional clause that taxes appor- tioned by Congress should be levied by the legislature. Cutler unsuccessfully urged Congress to insert a clause exempting the people of the territory from pay- ments until full representation in Congress was accorded. This was opposed on the ground that it would offer a premium to emigration. See Cutler, Journals Cutler, i, 293; cf. enabling act of Apr. 30, 1802, 2 Stat. 173-175. "The principle of the freedom of navigation of the western rivers was first introduced on May 12, 1786, on the motion of Grayson, of Virginia, seconded by King, of Massachusetts, in connection with the formulation of the report by Monroe on July 7 of that year (Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 637-638). For a judi- cial interpretation of the clause see Spooner v. McConnel (1 McLean, 337-338). This was an issue involving the right of the State of Ohio, under her constitution, to dam the Maumee River. An injunction had been prayed for on the ground that such action by the State was a violation of the ordinance of 1787. The in- junction was refused. Similarly, see Pollard r. Hagan (3 Howard, 230), Sands r. Maniste Imp. Co. (123 U. S. 288), and Strader v. Graham (10 Howard, 82). "An explanation of the provision for fewer states than was contemplated by the ordinance of 1784 is found in the resolution of July 7, 1786 (Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 663). For Monroe's view of the necessity of reversing the policy with reference to the creation of new states, and his unfavorable opinion of the char- acter of the lands northwest of the Ohio, see his letters to Jefferson, July 15 and Aug. 25, 1785, and Jan. 19 and July 16, 1786, Writings Jos. Monroe, I, 95- 97, 107-108,112-120,140-142. Although the principle of a limited number of states confined generally within natural boundaries, is first expressed in the report of Mar. 24, 1786 (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 75), which is embodied in the report and resolution of July 7, 1786 (Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 663), it appears in no succeeding draft until the final stage is reached in the report of July 11, 1787. 80 See ante, p. 7; post, p. 173.
Page 49
NORTHWEST TERRITORY of the great Miami to the said territorial line, and by the said territo- rial line.— The eastern State shall be bounded by the last mentioned direct line, the Ohio, Pensylvania, and the said territorial line; pro- vided however, and it is further understood and declared, that the boundaries of these three States, shall be subject so far to be altered, that if Congress shall hereafter find it expedient, they shall have authority to form one or two States in that part of the said territory which lies north of an east and west line drawn through the southerly bend or extreme of lake Michigan:31 and whenever any of the said States shall have sixty thousand free Inhabitants therein,32 such State shall be admitted by its Delegates into the Congress of the United States, on an equal footing with the original States, in all re- spects whatever; and shall be at liberty to form a permanent Consti- tution and State Government;33 provided the Constitution and Gov- ernment so to be formed, shall be Republican, and in conformity to the principles contained in these Articles; and so far as it can be con- sistent with the general interest of the Confederacy, such admission shall be allowed at an earlier period, and when there may be a less number of free Inhabitants in the State than sixty thousand. Article the Sixth—There shall be neither Slavery nor involun- tary Servitude in the said territory otherwise than in the punishment of crimes, whereof the Party shall have been duly convicted: Pro- vided always that any Person escaping into the same, from whom labor or service is lawfully claimed in any one of the original States, such fugitive may be lawfully reclaimed and conveyed to the person claiming his or her labor or service as aforesaid 34— 31 These boundaries were first proposed July 7, 1786 {Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 662). "Cf. ordinance of 1784 {Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxvi, 277). "See Scott v. Detroit Young Men's Society Lessee (i Douglas, 119; 5 Howard, 344-382), involving the right of Michigan to enter the Union without the consent of Congress. M This article, with the caption "at y* End of y« 5th Article—-Insert", is on a separate sheet, attached to the amended report of July 11, and appears to be in the handwriting of Dane. Cf. motion of Rufus King, Mar. 16, 1785, Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvm, 164-165. Congress approved the contemporary construction that a literal interpretation was not to be applied, to the extent at least of divesting the French inhabitants of their property in slaves (see com- mittee report, September, 1788, post, p. 149). The enforcement of the provision was in fact held in abeyance during the territorial periods of both Indiana and Illinois. In 1803 and in 1807 Indiana Territory adopted laws which established a system of servitude (Philbrick, ed., Laws Ind. Terr., IHC, XXI, xxxv-xxxvi, 42-46, 523-528). It may be pointed out, however, with reference to the French inhabitants who held slaves at the time of the adoption of the ordinance, that that instrument did not guarantee them in the possession of any form of property, even though the Virginia act of cession contained such a stipulation (ibid., p. xxv, n. 4). The courts subsequently held that slavery was illegal under the ordinance. See Jarrott v. Jarrott (7 111. 1); Menard v. Aspasia (5 U. S. 505).
Page 50
50 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the Resolutions of the 23d of April 1784,36 relative to the subject of this ordinance be, and the same are hereby repealed and declared null and void.38— Done &c37 RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS: TREATY WITH THE WABASH INDIANS ILC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.88] [July 21, 1787] Resolved That the Superintendant of Indian Affairs for the northern department39 and in case he be unable to attend then col Josiah Harmar immediately proceed to post St Vincent, or some other place more convenient in his Opinion for holding a treaty with the Wabash Indians, the Shawanese and other hostile tribes, that he inform those Indians that Congress is sincerely disposed to promote peace & friendship between their citizens and the Indians; that to this end he is sent to invite them in a friendly manner to a treaty with the United States to hear their complaints, to know the truth and the causes of their quarrels with those frontier settlers and having invited those Indians to the treaty he shall make strict enquiry into the causes of their uneasiness and hostile proceedings and form a treaty of peace with them if it can be done on terms consistent with the honor and dignity of the United States "Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxvi, 274-279. "The binding effect of the ordinance became the subject of judicial construction in after years, in connection especially with the various articles of compact. The prevailing opinion of both State courts and the United States Supreme Court (saving certain early decisions of the former) has been that the ordinance was abrogated by the Constitution of the United States; that the act of Congress, Aug. 7, 1789, post, p. 203, was repealed by the admission into the Union of the ter- ritories to which it applied. The adoption of State constitutions and the consent of Congress for admission annulled all provisions of the ordinance in conflict with the new constitutions (see citations in foregoing footnotes). It must be said, how- ever, that most if not all the provisions of the ordinance were incorporated into the constitutions of the northwestern states. Conformity with that instrument was made a requisite by the enabling acts of Congress. See Ohio Enabling Act (2 Stat. 174). See also Scott v. Detroit Young Men's Society Lessee (1 Douglas, 119; 5 Howard, 342-382). 87 In the official printed copy the statement in full is added: "Done by the United States in Congress assembled, the 13th day of July, in the year of our Lord 1787, and of their sovereignty and independence the 12th." M The original committee report is found in CC Papers, no. 27, fol. 329. It was first presented on July 19, debated and amended on that day and on two succeeding days, and passed July 21 {Journals Avier. Cong., IV, 759-762). See also report of the Secretary at War to Congress, July 10,1787, ante, p. 31. w Gen. Richard Butler, appointed Aug. 14, 1786 (Journals Amer. Cong., rv, 683).
Page 51
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 51 Resolved That the Superintendant of Indian affairs for the northern department inform the five Nations, the Hurons and other Indian nations who joined in the representation made to Congress dated 18th day of December 178640 that Congress on the 18th of the present month July 1787 received their said representation and have taken it into their serious consideration and in due time will send them an answer. Resolved That the Secretary at war place the troops of the United States in such positions as shall afford the most effectual protection to the frontier inhabitants of Pensylvania and Virginia from the incur- sions and depredations of the Indians—for preventing intrusions on the federal lands and promoting a favourable issue to the intended treaty; to this end one company and a half shall remain at Venango, Fort Pitt and fort M°Intosh, one be posted on the Muskinghum, one on the Miami; three at post St Vincents and the remaining troops at the rapids of the Ohio, subject however to such changes and alterations as the commanding officer shall judge the good of the service may require41 Resolved That the executive of Virginia be requested to give orders to the militia in the district of Kentucky to hold themselves in readi- ness to unite with the federal troops in such operations as the Officer commanding them may judge necessary for the protection of the fron- tiers; and that on the application of the commanding Officer of the federal troops, the said executive be requested to give orders that a part of the said militia not exceeding one thousand be embodied and take such positions as the said commanding Officer shall direct for act- ing in conjunction with the federal troops in protecting and defending the frontier inhabitants and in making such expeditions against the Indians in case they continue hostile as Congress shall hereafter order and direct. And the militia which shall be called into the actual serv- ice of the United States for the defence of the said frontier inhabitants or the purposes of such expeditions shall be paid supported and equip- ped by the state, and the state shall be credited in the requisition of the current year the amount of their pay and rations only, computed on the federal establishment for similar service; provided that no charges for the said service shall be valid unless supported by actual musters of the said militia made by the inspector or by a field officer of the troops of the United States agreeable to the orders of the com- manding officer Resolved That the board of treasury take order for providing for the subsistance of the Indians during the treaty and for defraying the inci- dental expences attending it, provided the said incidental expences shall not exceed one thousand dollars42 - Printed in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I. 8-9. 41 See the Secretary at War to Congress, July 10, 1787, ante, p. 81. a See document dated Oct. 26, 1787, post, p. 78. The instructions are in Knox to Harmar, July 22, 1787, Harmar Papers (1W328), Wis. Hist. Soc.
Page 52
52 TERRITORIAL PAPERS PROPOSALS OF S. H. PARSONS AND OTHERS FOR PURCHASE OF LANDS [LC:CC Papers, no. 41, vol. vm, fol. 234 :C] [July 21, 1787] It is proposed by S. H. Parsons, Rufus Putnam43 & M Cutler for themselves & Associates, to purchase of ye United States ye under- mentioned tract in the western territory of the United States, on ye following conditions Viz— inscription of y' Tract. A certain tract of land in the western territory of ye United States, bounded on y" east by ye western boundary of ye seventh rang[e] of townships, on the south by the Ohio river, on the west by ye River Scioto, & on the north by a due east & west line, run from ye north- west corner of the 10th township of the 7th range (reckening from ye Ohio) untill it shall intersect the Scioto44 Conditions— 1" The price to be three shillings & six pence lawful money, or 7/12 of a dollar, per Acre, payable in any of ye securities of ye United States. 2d In payment for ye lands, no interest shall be computed on the certificates paid in, provided that indents of interest, signed by ye Treasurer of the United States, shall be given to ye purchasers, for all arrearages of interest due on y" said cirtificates, to ye date of their payment, which indents shall be receivable in all ye general Requisi- tions, in proportion assigned to the respective Requisitions, on which they may be paid in. 3d The payments of ye above purchase to be made in y" following manner—viz. The 1" payment shall be within three months computed from y° date of this agreement: & shall amount to two hundred & fifty thou- sand dollars;—the second payment shall be when the survey of the above tract is made, & shall amount to four hundred thousand dol- lars;—the remainder shall be paid in six equal installments at y" expiration of every six months, computed from the date of ye second payment. "In 1790 Putnam was appointed by Congress as one of the three territorial judges, and in 1796 he became Surveyor General of the United States. Much of his correspondence in the latter position is printed in the present volumes. "Cf. memorial of May 8, 1787, ante, p. 29, and committee report of July 23, 1787, post, p. 54. For a contemporary explanation, by one of the participants, of the expansion of the original proposal so as to include the larger tract, see Cut- ler, ed., Journals Cutler, I, 292-305. Under date of July 20 Cutler records in his Journal: "I spent the evening (closeted) with Colonel Duer, and agreed to pur- chase more land, if terms can be obtained, for another Company [Scioto], which will probably forward the negotiations" (ibid., p. 295).
Page 53
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 53 4h When the first payment is made an Instrument of writing shall be delivered to the purchesers, signed by y" President of ye United States in Congress & Sealed with their Seal; declaring that the United States have Sold to S. P—R P. & M C. & their Associates for & in consideration of one dollar per acre, the tract of land above described.—On which the purchasers shall execute another instru- ment, binding themselves & their Associates for the Payment of the above purchase, agreeable to y" above conditions. And it shall be further declared, in the last mentioned Instrument, that the purchasers shall not be entittled to take possession of any part of ye lands contained in the above tract, only in the following man- ner.—viz—when the first payment is made, they shall have a right to take possession of a certain tract of land, bounded east by ye 7th range of townships, on ye south by ye Ohio river—on ye west by a line run due north from the western cape of the Great Kenhawa, so far as that, from its termination, a line run east to y" western boundary of ye seventh range of townships, may comprehend a quantity adequate to ye first payment—When the second payment is made they shall have a right to take possession of as great a quantity of lands as shall be, when added to the aforesaid quantity, equall to ye amount of one million of dollars; which lands shall be bounded on the east by ye western line of ye 7th range of townships, on ye south by ye first loca- tion, & on ye west by a continuation of y" line from the Great Ken- hawa, & on the north by an east & west line to ye western boundary of the 7th range of townships. Military rights, in ye ratio of one to seven, to be admitted in the above mentioned possessions, for the Officers & Soldiers of ye late Army, who may be proprieters in the said lands,45 &, also, two townships for the establishment of a Literary Institution.—When the first & second installments are completely paid, & not before, the purchasers shall have a right to take possesion of as great a quantity of lands, as the several payments at that time made, shall amount to—& this ratio of equal payment & possession shall be continued, untill ye whole payment & possesion is accom- plished.— When y" first & second payments are made, & the first installment completed, then the purchasers shall receive a federal deed for the quantity of land which shall be equal to ye purchase of one million of dollars, comprehended within the boundaries above mentioned; and after this period they shall from time to time receive deeds for as great a quantity of lands as their several payments shall entitle them to, at y" price agreed on.— {? Notwithstanding y" declaration of sale specified in ye first men- tioned instrument, the purchasers & their Associates bind & oblige "See resolution of Oct. 22, 1787, post, p. 76.
Page 54
54 TERRITORIAL PAPERS themselves, in case of failure in y" payments as above mentiond, to renounce all clame or pretention of right to any lands for which they have not made bona fida payment as before expressed, & the said Com- pany or individuals thereof shall have no kind of right or pretence to enter on or take possession of any parts of said tracts, of which such failure is made, & the said tracts shall be free to be sold by Congress to any person or persons whatever—And in case the said tracts of which such failure is made, be afterwards exposed to sale by Congress, ye present purchasers shall be liable to make up ye loss (if any) which may arise betwixt ye price of ye lands so sold, & what is hereby contracted for. 6th The purchasers shall have y" right of pre-emption of three addi- tional townships some where northerly of the tract above specified, at the price agreed on, & to take possession of ye same when the payment there of shall be duely made. 7th The afore said purchases, shall, at their own expence, within 7 years from date here of, lay off the whole tract which they shall pur- chase, in to townships & fractional parts of townships, & divid the same into lots according to ye land ordinance, & make complete returns thereof to ye board of Treasury—Lots N° 8—11—& 26 in each town- ship & fractional parts of townships to be reserved for ye future dispo- sition of Congress. Lot N° 16 to be given perpetually, by Congress, to ye maintenance of Schools, & lot N° 29, to ye purposes of religion in the said townships—two townships near ye center of ye second speci- fied tract, which comprehends ye purchase amounting to y" first men- tioned million of dollars, & of good land, to be also given by Congress for ye support of a literary Institution, to be applied to the intended object by ye Legislature of ye State. [Endorsed] Proposals of S. H Parsons July 21. 1787 40 COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE SALE OF LANDS47 [LC:CC Papers, vol. 190, Comm. Bk. Repts., pp. 154-157] [ July 23, 1787] Report of a Com" consisting of Mr Carrington Mr King Mr Dane Mr Madison & Mr Benson amended to read as follows viz48 That the board of treasury be authorized and empowered to con- tract with any person or persons for a grant of a tract of land which shall be bounded by the Ohio from the mouth of Sioto to the inter- *• See committee report, infra; Cutler and Sargent to Board of Treasury, July 26, 1787, post, p. 61; and the indenture of Oct. 27, 1787, post, p. 80. 47 Referred to contemporaneously as an "ordinance". *8 The action is on the memorials of Parsons, Cutler, and others (Ohio Com- pany) of May 8, ante, p. 29, and July 21, 1787, ante, p. 52.
Page 55
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 55 section of the western boundary of the seventh range of townships now surveying; thence by the said boundary to the northern bound- ary of the tenth township from the Ohio; thence by a due west line to Sioto; thence by the Sioto to the beginning upon the following terms viz—The tract to be surveyed and its contents ascertained by the geographer or some other officer of the United States who shall plainly mark the said east and west line and shall render one com- plete plat to the board of treasury and another to the purchaser or purchasers—The purchaser or purchasers within seven years from the completion of this work to lay off the whole tract at their own expence into townships and fractional parts of townships and to divide the same into lots according to the land Ordinance of the 20th of May 1785,49 compleat returns whereof to be made to the treasury board. The lot N 16 in each township or fractional part of a township to be given perpetually for the purposes contained in the said Ordinance. The lot N 29 in each township or fractional part of a township to be given perpetually for the purposes of religion. The lots N° 8. 11. and 26 in each township or fractional part of a township to be reserved for the future disposition of Congress. Not more than two complete townships to be given perpetually for the purposes of an university, to be laid off by the purchaser or purchasers as near the centre as may be so that the same shall be of good land to be applied to the intended object by the legislature of the State The price to be not less than one dollar per acre for the contents of the said tract excepting the res- ervations and gifts aforesaid payable in specie loan office certificates reduced to specie value or certificates of liquidated debts of the United States, liable to reduction by an allowance for bad land & all inci- dental charges & circumstances whatever provided that such allow- ance shall not exceed in the whole one third of a dollar per acre. And in making payment the principal only of the said certificates shall be admitted and the board of treasury for such interest as may be due on the certificates rendered in payment as aforesaid prior to Jany 1. 1786 shall issue indents for interest to the possessors which shall be receivable in payment as other indents for interest of the existing requisitions of Congress, and for such interest as may be due on the said certificates between that period and the period of payment the said board shall issue indents the payment of which to be provided for in future requisitions or otherwise. Such of the purchasers as may possess rights for bounties of land to the late army to be permitted to render the same in discharge of the contract, acre for acre, provided that the aggregate of such rights shall not exceed one seventh part of the land to be paid for and provided also that there shall be no future claim against the United States on account of the said rights. Not less than 500.000 dollars of the purchase money to be paid down upon Aide, p. 12.
Page 56
56 TERRITORIAL PAPERS closing of the contract and the remainder upon the completion of the work to be performed by the geographer or other officer on the part of the United States: good & sufficient security to be given by the pur- chaser or purchasers for the completion of the contract on his or their part. The grant to be made upon the full payment of the consider- ation money and a right of entry and occupancy to be acquired imme- diately for so much of the tract as shall be agreed upon between the board of treasury and the purchasers.60 REPORT OF COMMITTEE: INDIAN RELATIONS [LC:CC Papers, no. 80, fol. 317: D] [July 26, 1787] The Committee consisting of [blank] to whom was referred a Clause in a report of a Committee,51 relative to making provision for prevent- ing wanton and unjust attacks upon the Indians—report—that on carefully examining the subject referred to their consideration, they are fully convinced, that some early and effectual measures must be adopted by Congress, and the several States, whose frontiers are contiguous to the Indians, to prevent the further progress of the mutual depredations & hostilities between the Indians and some of the frontiers Inhabitants of those States—the committee are fully of opinion, that unless a Stop be put to those mutual Injuries, they must soon produce a strong confederacy of the Indians on the frontiers, and all the calamities of a general Indian war—& expose to the merciless revenge of the savages, not only the few guilty, but all the innocent Inhabitants of the frontier Settlements—that the murders and evils complained of, are the result of repeated aggressions, as well on the part of some of the frontier Inhabitants as on the part of the Wabash and several other tribes—that mutual Injuries and appre- hensions have produced so great and deep rooted animosities that no peace or cessation of hostilities can, reasonably, be expected to subsist between the parties, while an opportunity remains to lawless persons 40 There is no entry in the Journals with reference to this report. The above text, taken from the committee book reports, contains no endorsement relative to action thereon, but the committee report itself (CC Papers, no. 19, vol. v, fol. 27) is endorsed as having been referred to the Board of Treasury on July 23 to take order. The printed broadside of the same date (.ibid., fol. 31) contains a like endorsement. Although the ordinance was not satisfactory in some details (Cutler and Sargent to Board of Treasury, July 26, post, p. 61), the reference of the affair to the board to take order was interpreted to mean that the latter might use discretion in drawing the contract (Cutler, ed., Journals Cutler, I, 297). See indentures of Oct. 27, 1787, post, pp. 80 et seq., and the act of Apr. 21, 1792, 1 Stat. 251. « CC papers, no. 27, fol. 329 (July 19). The reference was on July 21, the date of the adoption of the report concerning a treaty with the Indians; ante, p. 50.
Page 57
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 57 to attack the Indians with impunity—but as there is, at present, no system of civil law established in the territory of the United States North west of the river Ohio, whereby the conduct of individuals can be controuled, or their offences or Crimes prevented or punished therein, the committee conceive, that, however it ought, in general, to be an object with Governments to try and punish offenders, not in military service, according to the Course of the civil laws of the land, yet, until such laws can be established in that territory, it is highly expedient, in the present State of things there, to try and punish offenders, who shall make unauthorised attacks upon the Indians, by such laws as can be carried into effect and with such dicision as to Stop the further progress of the lawless proceedings of individuals towards the Indians— Wherefore the Committee submit the following resolves— Resolved that no person, not an inhabitant of, or an officer or soldier Stationed in, the territory of the United States North west of the river Ohio, shall, after the first day of September next, and until the first day of September 1788, be allowed to pass through any part of the said territory, without a permit, Signed by the Secretary at war, the Superintendant of Indian affairs in the Northern Department the commander of the federal troops or commander of a separate post the geographer of the United States, or by some other officer named for that purpose, by the Secretary at war; and any such person found in any part of the said territory, during the period aforesaid without such perment or not licensed to be among the indians according to the ordinance for regulating Indian affairs passed August the 7th 1786,62 shall be arrested by the officers commanding the federal troops, confined not exceeding 8 days, and sent to the frontiers of one of the States and for a second or third offence shall be liable to be Whipped not exceeding forty Stripes63— and if any person in the said territory not otherwise liable to be punished for his or her offences shall kill, wound, assault or beat any Indian; destroy, secretly, or forceably, take away his or her property without lawful authority such person shall be arrested, confined, tried and punished in the same manner as the soldiers in the actual service of the United States in the said territory, may be arrested confined, tried and punished for like offences—and this law for punish- ing wrongs done to the Indians shall remain in force until other laws shall be made for trying and punishing the same— Resolved that it be recommended to the States of New York, Penn- sylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia to pay particular attention to the execution of their respective laws for preventing their ■ Ante, p. 20. ■ Cf. the British attempt to solve the problem of law and order in the same ter- ritory by a similar provision in the Mutiny Act of 1765 (5 Geo. Ill, c. 33).
Page 58
58 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Citizens respectively, from wrongfully invading the rights of the In- dians, and to the revision of those laws where the same may be inade- quate to the purposes of preventing Injuries being done to them when within the limits of the respective States [Endorsed] No 24 Report of Mr Dane Mr Grayson Mr Clarke for preventing unjust attacks on the Indians End read 26 July 1787 M PETITION OF THE INHABITANTS OF POST VINCENNES [LC:CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 107:C] [July 26,1787] To the Honorable the Congress of the United States of North America. The humble address of the inhabitants of Post Vincennes Sheweth: That your petitioners have, for upwards of sixty years, inhabited this country, where the Indian nations on the Wabash allowed them to live and make settlements: That the kings of England maintained us in our rights and privileges, after the cession made them of this country by the king of France:M That the State of Virginia confirmed the same when they took possession of the post:48 That when that State ceded to Congress their lands on the North-western side of the Ohio, they stipulated with your honorable body that the Inhabitants of the Illinois, and Post Vincennes should continue to enjoy the same rights, claims, and privileges which they had always enjoyed." Your petitioners beg leave to observe, that, previous to their being subjects of the United States, being chiefly addicted to the Indian trade, they, in a great measure, overlooked the advantages that can be derived from the cultivation of lands, and consequently neglected to avail themselves of the willingness of their Sovereigns and Gover- nors to grant them tracts sufficient for plantations. Contented to raise bread for our families, we neither extended our culture for the purpose of exportation, nor formed an idea of dividing among our- selves our fruitful country. The moment we were connected with the United States, we began to be sensible of the real value of lands; and 54 No reference has been found to further action on the report. 55 There is no evidence that the British Government at any time confirmed the rights and privileges of the inhabitants of Vincennes. On the contrary Gen. Thomas Gage, commander in chief of the British Army in North America, issued a proclamation on Apr. 8, 1772, ordering the French settlers to remove. This proclamation is printed in Dillon, Hist. Ind., pp. 86-87. An original copy is in the Gage Papers, William L. Clements Library, University of Michigan. Gen- eral Gage had seriously questioned the validity of the rights and titles of the in- habitants. For this view, see various expressions in Carter (ed.), Corr. Gen. Thos. Gage, I, 332, 343, 347-348, 352. M See Clark to the inhabitants of Vincennes, July, 1788, in James (ed.), G. R. Clark Papers (IHC, vm), 50-53. "Mar. 1, 1784, ante, p. 7.
Page 59
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 59 our decreasing peltry trade pointed out to us the necessity of applying ourselves to that new kind of industry. It was then that a grant of a large tract of territory made to us by the Pianquicha48 Indians began to be recollected, and that a number of our neighbours came to partake with us the blessings of a fruitful soil and healthy climate For a num- ber of years we had been neglected, and as it were forsaken by the power to whom we had willingly submitted—The resolves of Congress —the laws of America, respecting land-affairs, were utterly unknown to us. We had a grant from the Indians; we had settled the country; we had possessed it for a long series of years; our charter was as much (or indeed more) talked of among the Americans as among ourselves. Our confidence rested upon those principles; and fully persuaded in the simplicity of our hearts, that our right to the tract granted to us by the Pianquicha Indians was as clear and indisputable as that of inheritance, we did not scruple to give every adventurer who came to live with us a plantation of four hundred acres; not forgetting, how- ever, to leave those concessions subject to such regulations as might be hereafter made by Congress. As our acquaintance with our neigh- bours became more extensive, our charter began to appear to ourselves in a different light from what we had heretofore viewed it; and we are afraid it does not rest upon a sufficiently firm basis. We neither expect, nor wish, that a territory of two hundred and ten miles by seventy two should be exclusively appropriated to our small number— Accustomed to mediocrity, we do not wish for wealth, but for a mere competency. Reposing the most unbounded confidence in the justice, humanity and benevolence of the Honorable the Congress we sol- emnly surrender our charter, whatever it is, and throw ourselves upon your mercy. We have taken an exact account of the number of people now residing in the district of Post-Vincennes, and we humbly hope that the Honorable the Congress may be graciously pleased to grant us, in the vicinity of this place, as much land, for the use and sole benefit of the now inhabitants, as you in your wisdom may think adequate to our just right as ancient settlers, to our past sufferings, and present indigent circumstances. We beg leave to submit to your honorable body, our own expectations which, we hope, you will deem moderate, and grounded upon the principle of exciting among our- selves a spirit of industry and activity, more than upon a love of extensive property. First. That every male inhabitant of this district, without discrimi- nation of age, be entitled to five hundred acres of land. Second. That as much land as will be equal to the total quantity so granted be moreover conceded to the district as a community to be applied to public uses—such as building Court-houses, Jails, churches, bridges, repairing roads—&c. ** Piankashaw.
Page 60
60 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Upon these principles, and from the annexed calculation of the in- habitants of this district at the present sera,69 the total number of acres of land, which your petitioners humbly expect to obtain from the Honorable the Congress, will amount to five hundred and twenty thousand, or thirty miles square, an inconsiderable territory, com- pared to that granted to us by the indians who, at the time they gave it to us, were thought to be proprietors of the country. If, to principles of common justice, it were necessary to add motives of compassion, we might tell the Honorable the Congress a long tale of uninterrupted distresses, oppressions, and calamities, heaped up upon us with as unremitted and wanton a tyranny as borne by us with unparalled patience. We might tell them that we were once a happy and wealthy people, until we fell a prey to the unquenchable rapacity of those whom we had received as friends; that we, after vol- untarily and cheerfully becoming subjects of the State of Virginia were oppressed, plundered, deprived of the common rights of citizens by an army of petty tyrants who assumed powers which neither the legislature nor the Executive of their State had delegated to them. We might tell the Honorable the Congress that our attachment to the cause of America, and active zeal for its welfare, has subjected us to the enmity of those Indians who had, time immemorial, called us their fathers and friends; that we have, in repeated instances, ex- hausted our remaining substance, to make large presents to the Indians in order to stop their war-parties: That we are become as obnoxious to them as the Americans themselves, and have frequently endangered our lives, because we have refused to deliver up these our friends to their savage fury. These are facts to which all the Ameri- cans settled among us can bear witness. With a respectful confidence that the Honorable the Congress will listen to the justice of our humble petition, and look down upon us with an eye of commiseration, your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray for the welfare, honor and glory of the United States of North America. By Order, and in behalf of the inhabitants of Post Vincennes. J. M. P. Legrace first magistrate.60 (Signed) Pierre Gamelin—M'g't. N- Perrot—Magistrate. Post Vincennes, July 26th 1787 (signed) Antonie Gamelin secretary & Greffier. "CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 165. "> Col. J. M. P. Legras was a captain of militia at Vincennes under the British and after the capture of that post by Clark in 1778 became a loyal subject of the United States and Virginia. In 1779 he was appointed president of the Vincennes court by County Lieut. John Todd (James, ed., G. R. Clark Papers, IHC, XIX, 35 n.)".
Page 61
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 61 [Endorsed] Address of the Inhabitants of Post Vincennes to Con- gress. July 26th, 1787." (Copy) (enclosed in letter—Feby 21" 1788 from secy at War) Feby 22d 1788—Referred Mr Wadsworth Mr Irvine Mr White «2— __ THE BOARD OF TREASURY TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 140, vol. n, fol. 431 :DS] Board of Treasury July 26.1787. Sir We have the Honor of submitting to the Consideration of Congress the Copy of a Letter, received this day from Mr Manassah Cutler and Mr Winthrop Sargeant in consequence of the Act of Con- gress of the 23d instant. As the terms offered by these Gentlemen vary, in certain points, from the Conditions prescribed to this Board; we have informed the proposers, that we are not authorised to accept them, but that we would lay them without delay before Congress— We have the honor to be with great Respect Your Excellency's ObedtHble. Serv"— 0lu1m, ~ _ Samuel Osgood Arthur Lee His Excellency The President of Congress.— [Endorsed] Letter July 26th 1787. Board of Treasury. enclosing Copy of a Letter from Mess" Cutler & Sargeant in consequence. of act Congress 23d Inst— MANASSAH CUTLER63 AND WINTHROP SARGENT" TO THE BOARD OF TREASURY [LC:CC Papers, no. 190, p. 158 :C] New York July 26th 1787 Gentlemen, We observe by the Act of the 23d Inst65 that your honorable board is authorised to enter into a Contract for the sale of 81 A second petition dated Aug. 7, 1787, in identical language except for the omission of the last paragraph but one, and signed by Barthelemi Tardiveau as agent, is found in CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 115. B For favorable action by Congress, Aug. 29, 1788, see Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 858. See also instructions of the same date to Governor St. Clair, post, p. 146. M Organizer of the Ohio Company; see Cutler (ed.), Journals Cutler, passim. * In 1786, through the influence of Secretary at War Knox, Sargent was appointed a surveyor on the Seven Ranges. Partly as a result of his experiences in connection with that work he became interested in land speculation, and became a co-founder of the Ohio Company. He was elected Secretary of the Territory Northwest of the River Ohio in 1787, continuing in that office through successive appointments until 1798, when he was selected by President Adams as Governor of Mississippi Territory. In 1791 he also served as Adjutant General of the United States Army, and for somewhat more than half of the period of his tenure as Secretary of the Territory he was also Acting Governor.—Adapted from B. H. Pershing, "Winthrop Sargent," an unpublished monograph. 65 Ante, p. 54.
Page 62
62 TERRITORIAL PAPERS a tract of land therein described on certain conditions expressed in the Act. As we suppose this measure has been adopted in consequence of proposals made by us, in behalf of ourselves and associates, to a Com- mittee of Congress, we beg leave to inform you that we are ready to enter into a contract for the purchase of the lands described in the Act; provided you can conceive yourselves authorised to admit of the fol- lowing conditions, which in some degree vary from the report of the Committee Vizt— The subordinate Surveys shall be completed as mentioned in the Act, unless the frequency of Indian irruptions may render the same imprac- ticable without an heavy expence to the Company. The mode of payment we propose is half a million of dollars when the Contract is executed; another half million when the tract as de- scribed is surveyed by the proper Officer of the United States; and the remainder in six equal payments computed from the date of the second payment.— The lands assigned for the establishment of a University to be nearly as possible in the Centre of the first million and half of Acres we shall pay for; for to fix it in the Centre of the proposed purchase, might too long defer the establishment.— When the second payment is made the purchasers shall receive a deed for as great a quantity of land as a Million of dollars will pay for, at the price agreed on—After which we will agree not to receive any further deeds for any of the lands purchased, only at such periods, and on such Conditions as may be agreed on betwixt the board and the purchasers.— As to the security which the Act says shall be good and sufficient we are unable to determine what those terms may mean in the contempla- tion of Congress, or of your honorable board—We shall therefore only observe that our private fortunes, and that of most of our associates being embarked in the support of the purchase it is not possible for us to offer any adequate security, but that of the land itself, as is usual in great land purchases.— We will agree so to regulate the Contract, that we shall never be enti- tled to a right of entry, or occupancy, but on lands actually paid for, nor receive any deeds till our payments amount to a million of dollars, and then only in proportion to such payment.—The advance we shall always be under without any formal deed together with the improve- ments made on the lands, will we presume be ample Security, even if it was not the interest as well as the disposition of the Company to lay the foundation of their establishment, on a sacred regard to the rights of property.— If these terms are admitted we shall be ready to conclude the Con- tract—If not we shall have to regret, for a numerous Class of our Asso- ciates, that the Certificates they received as Specie, at the risque of
Page 63
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 63 their lives and fortunes, in support of the Common cause, must, for a considerable time longer, wait the tedious and precarious issue of pub- lic events; (altho' they are willing to surrender their right in them on terms advantageous to the public;)—and that the United States may lose an opportunity of securing in the most effectual manner, as well as improving the value of their western lands, whilst they establish a pow- erful barrier, against the irruptions of the Indians, or any attempts of the British power, to interrupt the security of the adjoining States."— We have the Honor to be, with the greatest respect for ourselves and associates, Gentlemen, Your obedient Humble Servants.— (Signed) Manh Cutler Winthrop Sargent — The Honorable The Board of Treasury compared with the original in the office of the Board of Treasury (Signed) Wm Duer Secy. REPORT OF COMMITTEE: PROPOSALS OF CUTLER AND SARGENT [LC:CC Papers, no. 190, p. 161, Comm. Bk. Repts.] July 27. 1787 Ordered That the above letter from Manh Cutler and Winthrop Sargent to the Board of Treasury containing proposals for the pur- chase of a tract of land described in the Act of Congress of the 23d inst87 be referred to the board of Treasury to take order—Provided that after the date of the second payment therein proposed to be made the residue shall be paid in six equal, and half yearly install- ments until the whole thereof shall be completed, and that the purchasers stipulate to pay interest on the sums due, from the Com- pletion of the Survey to be performed by the Geographer Whereas the United States in Congress Assembled have by their ordinance passed the 20th May 178588 among other things Ordained "that the Towns Gnadenhutten, Schoenbrun and Salem on the Muskingum and so much of the lands adjoining to the said Towns with the buildings and improvements thereon shall be reserved for the sole use of the Christian Indians who were formerly settled there, or the remains of that society, as may in the judgment of the Geog- rapher be sufficient for them to cultivate." Resolved That the board of treasury except and reserve out of any Contract they may make for the tract described in the report of the "See action of July 27, 1787, infra. * Ante, p. 54. ■ Ante, p. 12.
Page 64
64 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Committee which on the 23d instant m was referred to the said board to take order, a quantity of land around and adjoining each of the before mentioned Towns amounting in the whole to ten thousand acres, and that the property of the said reserved land be vested in the Moravian Brethern at Bethlehem in Pennsylvania, or a society of the said Brethern for civilizing the Indians and promoting Chris- tianity, in trust, and for the uses expressed as above in the said Ordi- nance—including Killbuck and his descendents, and the Nephew and descendants of the late Captain white Eyes, Delaware Chiefs who have distinguished themselves as friends to the cause of America— Ordered That the above be also referred to the Board of Treasury to take Order.70— THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. n, fol. 427:ALS] War Office August 1st 1787 SiR I have the honor to transmit to Congress a letter just received from Colonel Harmar with an enclosure containing the propositions of Mr Symmes relative to a settlement on the Wabash river 71 I have the honor to be Sir Your Excellency's most obedient humble servant H Knox His Excellency The President of Congress. [Endorsed] August 1.1787 Secy at War with letter of Col Harmar 15 July 71 Read—Augt 1" 1787—"with proposals of J. C. Symmes relative to a settlement on the Wabash River— ■ Ante, p. 54. 70 There is no Journals entry of this action. For subsequent legislation, see ordinance of Sept. 3, 1788, post, p. 153, and acts regulating grants of land for military services and for the Society of United Brethren, June 1, 1796, and Mar. 1, 1800 (1 Stat. 490-491; 2 ibid., 14-16). 7 1 See Symmes to people of Kentucky, May 29, 1787, Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 278-281. The paper was enclosed in a letter from Harmar to the Secretary at War, and on the CC Papers copy (no. 150, vol. II, fol. 417) is the following endorsement: "Copy proposals of Judge Symmes for establishing a settlement on the Wabash." 72 CC Papers, no. 150, vol. Ill, fol. 423, copy. The copyist erroneously dated the letter as of June 15.
Page 65
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 65 ADDRESS TO COLONEL JOSIAH HARMAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. n, fol. 505 :Cn] [August 4, 1787] Copy of an address of the American Inhabitants at Post Vincennes to Colonel Harmar.— Col: Jos: Harmae. Sir. Amidst the public testimonies of satisfaction, which display themselves upon every countenance, since peace, harmony, and order have, at your call, revisted this, heretofore, unhappy country, how peculiarly unfortunate must our situation be when an event in which all good men rejoice is, nevertheless, likely to be attended with some discouraging circumstances to us, the american Inhabitans of this post. If we understand your heart, Sir, your own sensations at the sight of a people whom you have rendered happy, pure as their source is, must needs be mixed with some degree of painful recollection, when you consider that you cannot discharge your whole duty without dis- tressing a considerable number of your fellow-creatures. It is from a conviction of this sympathising benevolence of your's, Sir, that we are encouraged to hope that, thro' your mediation, we may yet share in the public joy. You are too well acquainted with the nature of the principle on which we had made settlements within the boundaries of the french charter, not to make it unnecessary for us to dwell on that subject. The proclamation of Congress,74 and the orders published by yourself,75 have filled our hearts with anxiety, gloominess, and dismay. We cannot, however, give up as yet our faint remains of hope, that Congress will condescend to look favorably upon our respectful peti- tion, which we take the liberty to transmit to you, Sir; and, if you deign to countenance it, we have not the least doubt but that your powerful protection, concurring with the annexed recommendation of the french inhabitants in our behalf, will have the desired effect. We have the honor to be with respect, Sir, Your most obedient hum- ble servants. August 4th 1787. By Order and in behalf of the American settlers at Post Vincennes. (signed) Ja' Holeday. Jn° Small. Ja8 Johnson. B Becker. Moses Decker. "There is also a copy in Harmar Papers (1W337-339), Wis. Hist. Soc.; ibid. (1W321), is also a letter to Harmar from the French inhabitants, July 28, 1787. 74 Resolution of Apr. 24, 1787 {Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 740), carrying into effect the proclamation of Sept. 22, 1783 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., Xxv, 602). See also report of the Secretary at War, Apr. 19, 1787, ante, p. 26. »«See Harmar to Knox, Aug. 7, 1787, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 26-30. 1a««to-34—I
Page 66
66 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [Endorsed] —N° 3—The Address of the American Inhabitants at post Vincennes to Colonel Harmar. (Copy)78 PETITION TO CONGRESS FROM POST VINCENNES [LC:CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 131: ALS] [August 7, 1787] To the Honorable the Congress of the United-States of North-America The humble Address of the American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes Sheweth That your Petitioners, after a long & severe struggle for liberty, finding themselves, by the necessary contributions to the charges of a just & expensive war, by the declension of trade, and the consequent neglect of husbandry, reduced to poverty & misery, and seeing no prospect of relief at home, went to seek far distant countries where they might expect to raise a subsistance by their industry. Neither the distressing circumstance of leaving behind us the dear connexions of our youth, the country that gave us birth, the fields for which we bled; nor the tediousness of a journey of several months; nor the dangers to which we have been exposed from the elements, from the Indians, from a total want of provisions, were able to deter us from our undertaking. We had heard of a Charter under which the french inhabitants of Poste Vincennes held a considerable territory; we vis- ited them, and found that their lands were such as answered all our wishes. The french chearfully invited us to settle ourselves among them: we purchased some of their ancient settlements, and obtained from their Court of justice warrants & Deeds for further locations within the boundaries of their Charter. Our industry became a spur to their's; from us they learnt the usefulness of husbandry; and, if there be any merit in promoting a love of rural employments, we flatter ourselves we have deserved well of mankind by disseminating the arts beneficial to human societies. We confess that at an early period previous to our arrival in this country, and lately, some unwar- rantable proceedings very injurious to the good people here have taken place; but we are happy in the testimony of all the french settlers that not one of your Petitioners, in whose behalf they have wrote to Colonel Harmar, has in any shape been accessary to their sufferings. We had hitherto possessed our lands with all the security that the laws of our country had taught us to repose in the sacredness of a Charter. What must have been our surprise & concern when we 74 Transmitted in Harmar to the Secretary at War, Aug. 7,1787, foe. eit. A con- temporary copy of Harmar's letter is in CC Papers, no. 150, vol. II, fol. 485.
Page 67
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 67 lately understood that the rights of the french, a few ancient conces- sions excepted, had not a more solid foundation than a gift from the Indians, which tho' of an older date than the late glorious Revolution may perhaps be overruled, & which besides the french have offered to give up to Congress! Struck with amazement & consternation, we are at the eve of seeing our distresses renewed, with the additional anguish of deluded hope. A ray of comfort, however, throws yet a glimpse of light through our darkened prospect. We hope every thing from the equity & generosity of the Honorable the Congress; and confiding that they will be graciously pleased to grant to every male American inhabitant of this district, of any age whatever, a tract of five hundred acres of land, or whatever you may think proper, adjoining that of the french settlers, Your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray for the welfare honor & glory of the United- States of North-America. By order & in behalf of the American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes Bartholomew Tardiveau 77 Poste Vincennes August 7th 1787. Agent [Endorsed] N° 6. THE MAGISTRATES OF KASKASKIA TO BRIGADIER GENERAL HARMAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 85:C] Kaskaskias 25th August 1787. Sir/ Convinced that the principal object you had in view in visiting this district, was to subsitute order in the place of anarchy and con- fusion, under which we have groaned for a long time. The Magistrates of Kaskaskias have the honor to address you to employ the credit your command gives you among us, in giving to the Laws their force, and to the Magistrates their respectability, which the unhappiness of the times has deprived them off. The people of this district Sir do not refuse to be under the Administration of a salutary police, and a good government—But we have experienced such un- happy changes in our administration that the authority of the Magis- trate scarcely exists. . We are certain Sir, that if you will assemble the people previous to your departure, and in their presence recommend to them obedience to the Laws, and a proper respect to the Magistrates, that we shall "A French mercantile adventurer. In 1793 he was attached to the Genet mission as interpreter. For an account of, see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), cxxxvi; id., Kwsk. Recs. (IHC, V), 443.
Page 68
68 TERRITORIAL PAPERS have the satisfaction yet to see, justice, peace, union and happiness reigning among us. We have the honor &c— (Signed) La Chanry Fr. Conget de Brazaux 78 j. S. G. Bauvais 79 Vitale Bauvais. Col° Harmar. [Endorsed] A Letter from the Magistrates of Kaskaskias to Colonel Harmar dated Kaskaskias 25. Augt 1787 Copy.80 PETITION TO CONGRESS FROM THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [LC:CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 135: ADS] [August 27, 1787] To the Honorable the Congress of the United-States of North-America The Petition of the American inhabitants of the Illinois81 humbly sheweth That, some time before the epocka that terminated a glorious war and secured independance to the sons of America, Your Petitioners, ex- hausted by military services & necessary contributions to the support of the Continental armies & other public charges, having nothing left but liberty and Spirits that could neither be borne down under the weight of poverty nor deterred by difficulties, determined to seek an asylum into some of the rich countries which the fate of war had sub- jected to the American empire. The fame of the fruitfulness of the Illinois lands had reached our ears: thither we directed our wandering course, unmindful of a long & perilous navigation, of the inclemency of the seasons, of the savage fury of innumerable Indian tribes through whom we had to fight our way. Invited to settle here by the ancient inhabitants, allured by the fertility of the soil, and above all encour- aged by the hope that our settlements, made under the sanction of the State of Virginia, would be sacred & inattackable, we began to culti- vate our lands with that unwearied activity that the love of happiness inspires, but which is only fostered up by the certainty of enjoying property undisturbed. "The Brazaux family removed to St. Louis in 1787, shortly after the date of this document; Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, II), 19. ™ For the prominent position of the Bauvais family, consult ibid., index. «° Enclosed in Harmar to the Secretary at War, Nov. 24, 1787 (CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 89), and transmitted to Congress, Feb. 21, 1788, loe. cit. "For a list of names of Americans resident in the Illinois country at this time see CC Papers, no. 48, fols. 143-147, 158-159, and Mason (ed.), "Lists of Early Illinois Citizens", Chicago Hist. Colls., iv, 192-229.
Page 69
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 69 When Virginia ceded this country to Congress, by a Deed subscribed by their Delegates in March 1784,8! they stipulated in our behalf that the settlers who had professed themselves citizens of that State should have their possessions & claims confirmed to them; which was agreed to by Congress. Under these circumstances, Your Petitioners humbly conceive that the Proclamations of the Honorable the Congress, forbid- ding people to settle on the public lands on the North-western Side of the Ohio,83 are not in any sense applicable to them. We did not come hither in defiance to the laws of our country, but under the protection of the State of Virginia then Sovereign of this territory: we did not set- tle on the public unappropriated lands of Congress, but on those that were the property of Virginia, which she has since confirmed, and Con- gress themselves warranted to us. We claim yet another title which, in our humble opinion, is not of less weight nor less respectable. An opinion has always prevailed in these countries that the french settlers have Charters for extensive tracts of territory; and within the compass as well as upon the faith of those Charters we have Settled ourselves. Such are the grounds on which we stand; but notwithstanding those titles which we had hitherto looked upon as sacred, a discouraging ru- mour is spread among us, which owes its birth to the Proclamations of Congress lately come to our Knowledge, that all the American settlers on this side the Ohio are to be turned off their lands by the first of Sep- tember next. This unexpected piece of intelligence, we confess, did at first allarm not a little Your Petitioners; but after recollecting our- selves, trusting in the sacredness of the rights which we derive from the State of Virginia, and confiding in the justice of the Honorable the Congress, we are emboldened to hope that you will be pleased to con- firm our possessions by a Solemn Deed, and further to take into your gracious consideration the peculiar circumstances of our hitherto precarious Situation. When we began our Settlements in this country, we found ourselves Surrounded by a great number of Indian tribes whose hostile disposi- tions towards the Americans did not permit us to extend our culture & define properly the lands which we meant to occupy. Penned up in forts & small garrisons, we have been obliged to raise our subsistance out of a few fields tilled in common; and, after a severe struggle of many years, the greater number among us have not yet been able to ascertain and secure their possessions. In this difficult predicament, Your Petitioners humbly intreat that the Honorable the Congress be pleased to ascertain their unsettled Situation, and confirm to them a Grant of five hundred acres of land for every male inhabitant, without any discrimination of age, or else whatever quantity your wisdom may 13 Ante, p. 6. n Journal* Amer. Cong., IV, 740.
Page 70
70 TERRITORIAL PAPERS think proper.—Should this appear to be too great a favour, We beg leave to observe to Your Honorable body that this part of the country is almost entirely destitute of wood, & that this circumstance makes it necessary to have a larger extent of ground to answer the various pur- poses of husbandry. With a respectful confidence that the Honorable the Congress will not overlook our grounded expectations as claimants under the french Charters, our rights as Settlers under the State of Virginia, and our sufferings as a wandering family, Your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray for the honor welfare & glory of the United-States of North-America. By order and in behalf of the American inhabitants of the Illinois Bartholomew Tardiveau Agent Kaskaskia August the 27th 1787./. [Endorsed] N° 7. PETITION OF JOHN CLEVES SYMMES FOR A GRANT OF LAND [LC:CC Papers, no. 42, vol. VII, fol. 295: ADS «] [August 29, 1787] To his excellency the president of Congress, the petition of John Cleves Symmes85 of New Jersey sheweth, That your petitioner encouraged by the resolutions of Congress of the 23rd and 27th of July last,88 stipulating the conditions of a transfer of federal lands on the Sioto and Muskingum rivers unto Winthrop Seargeant and Manaseh Cutler esquires and their associates of New England, is induced on behalf of the Citizens of the United States westward of Connecticut who also wish to become purchasers of fed- eral lands, to pray that the honorable the Congress will be pleased to direct that a contract be made by the honorable the commissioners of the treasury board with your petitioner for himself and his associates in all respects similar in form and matter to the said grant made to Mess™ Sargeant and Cutler differing only in quantity and place where, and instead of two townships for the use of an university, that one only be assigned for the benefit of an academy. M There is a copy in the Force Transcripts (St. Clair), Library of Congress. M Symmes was elected as one of the three territorial Judges in 1787. There is an account of his life in C. H. Winfield, "Life and Services of John Cleves Symmes ", Procs. N. J. Hist. Soc, 2 ser., V, 22-43. Papers illustrating his land ventures are in Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, passim, and in the present volumes. "The former is printed ante, p. 54, and the latter in Journals Amer. Cong., iv, app., 18.
Page 71
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 71 That by such transfer to your petitioner and his associates, on their complying with the terms of sale, the fee may pass of all the lands lying within the following limits, viz. Begining at the mouth of the great Miami river, thence runing up the Ohio to the mouth of the little Miami river, thence up the main stream of the little Miami river to the place where a due west line to be continued from the western termina- tion of the northern boundary line of the grant to Mess" Sargeant, Cutler & company shall intersect the said little Miami river, thence due west continuing the said western line to the place where the said line shall intersect the main branch or stream of the great Miami river, thence down the great Miami to the place of begining. Jn° C. Symmes. New York the 29th of August 1787 The Committee consisting of [blank] to whom was referred the aforesaid petition report that—that the said petition be referred to the board of Treasury to take order— [Endorsed] N° 61 Pet. J. C. Symmes read 29 Sept 1787 Sept 21 Referred to Mr Dane Mr Grayson Mr Clarke Mr Smith Mr Johnson Oct 2 1787 Referred to the board of treasury to take order87 WILLIAM GRAYSON TO JAMES MADISON [LC: Madison Papers: ALS] N York Augt 31" 1787. D Sir Inclosed is a stragling letter which has found it's way to this place:—I have recieved your favor & shall pay every attention to the case of Majr Turner:88—his chance with respect to the Secretary- ship is absolutely desperate; he must therefore be nominated for a Judges seat:—this he has agreed to himself as appears by a letter to Mr Carrington. Judge Symms of Jersey yesterday made an application for All that tract of country lying between the Great & little Miami the East & West line & the Ohio supposed about two millions of acres, on the same terms with the Eastern Ohio Compy89—his application has met with the intire approbation of the Members present: & there is no doubt but as soon there is a Congress that this contract will be closed.— « See contract of Oct. 15,1788 (Burnet, Notes, pp. 490-491); acts of Apr. 12,1792, post, p. 388, May 5, 1792, post, p. 394; request for alteration of contract, Sept. 29, 1794, post, p. 490. a See Rufus King to Sargent, Aug. 5, 1787, Sargent Papers (MHS). 89 See ante, p. 70.
Page 72
72 TERRITORIAL PAPERS A Commee is appointed to draught an ordnance for indiscriminate locations,90 but a difficulty has occurred which I fear will destroy the whole affair: the CommM don't know what the deficiency is on the Cumberland river & have figured to their timorous & suspicious imaginations that the Virginia officers & soldiers mean to take eight or ten million of acres, between the Scioto & Miami.—The Comm" also contend that the State of Virg* should make proof of the deficiency of good lands on the Cumberland; should ascertain the quantity they want or have a right to on the Northern side of the Ohio; & should then take that quantity in one Body:—I wish you would Speak to our Governor on the subject. Perhaps it may be in his power shortly to obtain information of the quantity claimed by the Officers & Soldiers on the other side of the Ohio: If this fact was known other difficulties might perhaps be got over as I apprehend it is not very considerable.—M" Grayson has been very ill since her lying in, but is now much better. from yr Affect frd & most Obed Sert Willm Grayson NB—The Missisippi is in a State of absolute dormification.— PETITION TO CONGRESS FROM THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [LC:CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 119 :DS] [September 15, 1787] To the Honorable the Congress of the United-States of North-America The Humble Petition of the french inhabitants of Kaskaskia, Cahokia, Prairie du rocher, & village Sl Philipp91 Sheweth That the people of this country of the Illinois conceive themselves to be on the eve of total destruction, unless the justice, humanity, & benevolence of the Honorable the Congress hasten to rescue them from impending ruin, by timely taking into their gracious consider- ation the wretched state of the district. Placed at an immense dis- tance from the seat of the foederal government of America, Your Petitioners have always lived in a dangerous security concerning the lands which they were wont to consider as their own; and it is but of late that they have been awakened to fear & anxiety.92 We hear from M Appointed May 2, 1787, to report on the letter of Secretary at War Knox of Apr. 26 on the subject of lands due to officers and soldiers of the late army. The report was rendered on Oct. 12 and passed on Oct. 22, 1787 (CC Papers, no. 27, fol. 347; ibid., no. 190, Comm. Bk. Repts., p. 148). See "Supplement to the Land Ordinance of 1785", July 9, 1788, post, p. 122. •1This group of French villages comprised the so-called "Illinois Country". For previous history see Alvord, III. Country, passim. K The security of the Illinois French in their liberties and privileges had been assured by General Gage in 1764, acting for the British Government (A.S.P.,
Page 73
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 73 all quarters that the Wabash & Illinois countries are offered for sale, and that large tracts of these territories have already been purchased. In a few months, perhaps, the whole will be disposed of; and Your Petitioners, whose ancestors made the first Settlements here, & who have been faithfully attached to the United-States from the be- ginning of the late glorious Revolution, will find themselves contracted within the narrow bounds of the very inconsiderable improvements they have made in the vicinity of their villages. Soon, the industrious Americans will convert our forests into flour- ishing plantations: their furrows will reach to the fences of our gar- dens: our peltry-trade, already much decayed, must be entirely anni- hilated by the rapid march of husbandry, the retreat of the Indian nations, & the flight of the wild game. This accelerated progress of tillage, we Know, is infinitely more beneficial to mankind than the present unimproved state of an extensive & rich country; and we do not wish to check, but to be permitted to partake with our neighbours & friends, the advantages of encouraged activity & industry. As orig- inal Settlers, as faithful friends to the cause of independance, as an unhappy people who have lost their all by a System of oppression which we have fully displayed in our Memorial, We beg, & humbly hope that the Honorable the Congress may be graciously pleased to Grant to every male inhabitant of these villages of Kaskaskia Cahokia, Prairie du Rocher, & Sl Philipp, without any discrimination of age, a tract of five hundred acres of land, Gratis & for ever, in the vicinity of their respective villages. full of the most respectful confidence in the equity & generosity of the Honorable the Congress, Your Peti- tioners as in duty bound will ever pray for the welfare, honor, & glory of the United-States of North-America. Kaskaskia September 15th 1787. By order & in behalf of the french inhabitants of the Illinois 93 Bartholomew Tardiveau94 [Endorsed] N° 2. Agent Pub. Lands, n, 209; Alvord and Carter, eds., Critical Period, IRC, x, 395-396), and by the American Congress in 1783 (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., xxv, 689). See also report of committee of Congress, Aug. 23, 1786, on an earlier petition of the inhabitants of Kaskaskia, CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 491. "For an earlier memorial on behalf of the Illinois French, transmitted to Con- gress by Francis Carbonneaux, Dec. 8, 1784, see CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 455. On Feb. 21, 1785, Congress resolved to send commissioners to Kaskaskia, although nothing was finally done in the matter (Journals Cont. Cong., LC ed., XXVIII, 87). The report of the committee of Congress, May 7, 1787, with recommendations, is printed in Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 399-401. M Similar memorials presented by Tardiveau may be found, ibid., pp. 454-465, 475-479, 485-488, 491-497; and the reports of committees of Congress to whom the memorials were referred, ibid., pp. 465, 479-482.
Page 74
74 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE BOARD OF TREASURY TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 140, vol. n, fol. 457 :LS] Board of Treasury Sepr 23d 1787 Sir A Doubt has arisen during the present Sales of the Western Lands, whether it was the Intention of Congress by their Ordinance of the 20th May 1785,96 that in Payment of Purchases made under it Interest should be computed on the Principal of the Securities; and received in Payment on the same Terms with the Principal—In the Sales which have hitherto taken Place, a Declaration has been made to the Purchasers that the Interest on the Securities, to be received in Payment, was not to be computed—To prevent however any Discussion which may arise in future as to the Construction put by the Board on the Ordinance of Congress; We request to be favord with the Sense of that honorable Body on the Clause of the Ordinance above referr'd to, that we may govern ourselves accordingly— We have the Honor to be with, great Respect, Your Excellency's most Obedt Humble Serv"— Samuel Osgood Walter Livingston Arthur Lee To His Excellency The President of Congress— [Addressed] Board of Treasury. His Excellency The President of Congress— [Endorsed] Letter 22 Sept 1787 Bd Treasy Read 24. Acted on 24. Sept—for an explanation of the ordinance for the sale of western lands—respecting the Interest of Certificates69 PROPOSAL OF ROYAL FLINT97 AND ASSOCIATES FOR A PURCHASE OF LAND [LC:CC Papers, Comm. Bk. Repts., no. 190, pp. 174-175 :C] [October 18, 1787] The Subscribers for themselves and associates with great humility propose to the United States to contrat for the purchase of the two following tracts of Land Viz. ■ Ante, p. 12. M This was a confirmation of the Treasury policy, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 774. "A close friend and business associate of William Duer, secretary to the Board of Treasury (Alvord, III. Country, p. 395). For his speculative activities
Page 75
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 75 "A tract of Country beginning at the Junction of the Little Wabash . River, and running due West sixty miles, thence due North thirty miles, or to such distance as a due East Course will intersect the Wabash River at the mouth of the White River, and continuing the same course forty miles due East of the Wabash, thence due South to the River Ohio, thence down the same along the different courses thereof to the Mouth of the Wabash, thence up the Wabash to the place of beginning at the mouth of the aforesaid Little Wabash so as to include two millions of Acres" Also a tract of Country beginning at Cape Au gras on the East bank of the Mississippi, and runing due North Sixty miles, thence due East fifty miles or until this Course intersects the Ulonois River thence due South Sixty five Miles, or to such distance as a due West Course will reach the Mississippi at the South side of the mouth of Wood River, thence up the different courses of the Mississippi, including all the Islands near the Eastern side of it, to the place of beginning at the aforesaid Cape Au Gras so as to include one million of Acres. The terms of payment to be the same as agreed to by Congress on the Application of John C. Symmes of the 29th of August 17879S— with this exception—That in consideration of the proposers under- taking for themselves and associates to make the Necessary advances for the purchase of the Indian Right of the said described tracts in the Name and behalf and under the authority and Regulations of the United States, they shall have an allowance in the said Contract of four compleat Townships in full compensation of all their trouble and expences on this account; and likewise that the payment of the first proportionate installment shall only take place at the expiration of Nine Months after the purchase of the Indian Right is Effected, and Notified to the United States in Congress.— Should our proposals be accepted we beg leave to observe that exclusive of the benefit which would accrue to the United States from sinking a considerable Sum of the domestic debt, that their association is founded on such principles, and Combined with such Characters, as will not only enable them in a short time to divert within the Terri- tory of the Union the Valuable branches of Indian trade which are now almost Monopolized by Spanish and British subjects, but by collecting into Regular settlements the scattered inhabitants in the Illonois Country, prevent their retiring (as they are now doing) under in the Illinois country, consult Alvord, ed., Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 449-451, 471- 472, 483-489. For Revolutionary War record, see Heitman, Hist. Reg. Off. Cont. Army, p. 178. « Ante, p. 70.
Page 76
76 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the Jurisdiction of a power which may at some future period become Hostile to the interest of these States (Signed) Royal Flint Jos: Parker" for themselves and associates.— New York October 18th 1787 1 RESOLUTIONS CONCERNING BOUNTY LANDS AND AN INDIAN TREATY [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [October 22, 1787] On the report of a comee consisting of Mr Carrington Mr King Mr Dane Mr Madison & Mr Cook to whom was referred a letter of the Secretary at War of the 26 of April last,2 Resolved That a million of acres of land to be bounded east by the seventh range of townships, south by the land contracted for by Cutler and Sargent3 and to extend north as far as the ranges of townships and westward so far as to include the above quantity, also a tract to be bounded as follows beginning at the mouth of the river Ohio thence up the Mississippi to the river Au Vause, thence up the same until it meets a west line from the Mouth of the little Wabash thence easterly with the said West line to the Great Wabash, thence down the same to the Ohio & thence with the Ohio to the place of beginning,4 be reserved and set apart for the purpose of satisfying the military bounties due to the late army and that no locations other than for the said bounties be permitted within the said tract until they shall be fully satisfied That the Secretary at War take measures for ascertaining the existing claims for such bounties and that the Geographer proceed to have the same surveyed under the direction of the Secretary at War agreeably to the terms upon which they have been promised.— M Parker arrived in the Illinois country in 1786 and became a partisan of the French faction against the rule of John Dodge (Alvord, III. Country, p. 395). In the same year he carried a petition of the French to Congress (id., Kask. Recs., IHC, v, cxxx, cxxxii). He was again in Kaskaskia in 1787 and assisted the French in driving Dodge from power. For Colonel Harmar's unfavorable opinion, see Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 35. See also letter of Parker to St. Clair, then President of Congress, Oct. 2, 1787, Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, v), 410-411. 1 See also memorial of Royal Flint, Aug. 8,1788, ibid., p. 489. » Ante, p. 27. » July 23, 1787, ante, p. 54. See acts regulating grants of land for military services, June 1, 1796 (1 Stat. 490-91) and March 1, 1800 (2 ibid., 14-16). • See map in Winsor, West. Movement, p. 364.
Page 77
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 77 On motion of Mr Lee seconded by Mr Irvine Resolved That the governor of the Western territory be and he is hereby empowered to hold a general treaty with the adjacent Indian tribes in the ensuing spring if in his judgment the public good requires it and that he be authorised to draw for such sums of the money appropriated by the resolve of Congress of the 12th instant6 as may be necessary to effect this object, not exceeding in the whole the sum of fourteen thousand dollars REPORT OF THE BOARD OF TREASURY: PROPOSAL OF ROYAL FLINT AND JOSEPH PARKER [LC:CC Papers, Comm. Bk. Repts., no. 190, pp. 175-176] [October 22, 1787] The Board of Treasury to whom was referred the above proposal of Royal Flint and Joseph Parker relative to the purchase of Certain Tracts of the Western Territory, Report, "That the said proposal is founded on the same principles as have been agreed to by Congress on the Contracts of Messrs Cutler and Sargent, and Mr John C. Symmes, with these exceptions Viz. That the proposers offer on their part, and on their own advance (to be hereafter compensated) to extinguish the Indian Claim to the Tracts which they propose to purchase—and That the proportionate Installments on the respective tracts should only be paid at nine months after the Notification of the said Indian purchase being Compleated— On the Matter in reference the Board are of Opinion that if Congress should agree to the sale of the tracts described in the Memorial; that it would be proper that the United States should Extinguish the Indian Claims to the said described Tracts Should any exist— That it would be further proper, that the first proportionate pay- ments, on the Respective tracts should be made when ever the several Contracts for the same should be compleated—as in the case of other Contracts; and that nothing in the said Grants should affect any Claims of Individuals which have been secured to them by the Act of Cession of the State of Virginia 8 or any Act of Congress."— October 22d mi- Resolved That Congress agree to the above report, and that it, together with the proposal of Royal Flint and Joseph Parker, be referred back to the Board of Treasury to take order.— • Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 798. • Ante, p. 6.
Page 78
78 TERRITORIAL PAPERS RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS: THE SALE OF LANDS [LC:CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 133 :D] [October 23, 1787] R. That the Board of Treasury be & they are hereby authorised & empowered to enter into Contracts in behalf of the U S with any person or persons for any quantity of land in the western territory the Indian rights whereon have been extinguished not less than one million of acres in one body upon the same terms as it respects price payment & surveying with those directed in the contract with M. Cutler & W Sargent on the [blank7] day of [blank 7] Provided that no tract contracted for shall have a front on the Ohio, Mississipi Wabash or Illinois rivers exceeding one third its depth from the said rivers and provided that no gift of land be made for seminarys of learning or other purpose than those contained in the Ordinance of the 20th May 85—except the quantity contained in any one contract shall contain a quantity greater or equal to the aforementioned contract of Cutler & Sargent & that the sd Contract shall be in a State as described by the 5th Article of the Ordinance for the Govt of the territory of the U. S North west of the river Ohio passed the 13th day of July 1787 other than that wherein the Contract of the sd Cutler & Sargent is— [Endorsed] N» 20 Motion—Mr Kean—to empower the Board of treasury to make contracts for sale of western territory—Passed Oct. 23d 1787. 8 THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SF:1 Cong., 1 sess.: C] October 26th 1787— Instructions to the Governor of the territory of the United States North West of the river Ohio relative to an Indian treaty in the northern Department.9— Sir You are carefully to examine into the real temper of the Indian tribes inhabiting the Northern Indian department of the United » Oct. 27, 1787, post, p. 80. 'Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 802-803. 8 Printed also in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 9; Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 36-37. There are numerous differences between these printed versions and the contemporary copy herewith presented. The document sent has not been found. In CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 327, is the original draft of the instructions as reported by the committee on Oct. 26, to which is attached, as a part of the document, the resolution of Congress as printed in the Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 804. The report of the committee is endorsed as follows: "No. 26 Report Mr Kean M' Clarke, Mr Grayson Instructions to Coram" for holding treaties with Northern & Southern Indians Passed Octr 26th 1787 (Secret Journal)." This is printed in Secret Journals, Dom. Affairs, I, 274-278.
Page 79
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 79 States—if You find it hostile, and that the welfare of the frontiers, and the settlements forming in that country, demand a treaty, You will then in conjunction with the Super Intendant of Indian affairs for the northern department,10 unless the attendance of the said Super Intendant shall be prevented by any unforeseen event,11 hold as general a one as You can with all the tribes.— The primary objects of the treaty are, the removing all causes of controversy, so that peace and harmony may continue between the United States and the Indian tribes, the regulating trade, and settling boundaries.—For these purposes You will do every thing that is right & proper.— The treaties which have been made may be examined but must not be departed from, unless a change of boundary beneficial to the United States can be obtained.— Altho the purchase of the Indian right of Soil is not a primary object of holding this treaty, Yet You will not neglect any opportunity that may offer of extinguishing the Indian rights to the westward as far as the river Mississippi— You may stipulate that the East & West Line ordered to be run by the Ordinance of the 20th of May 1785 12 shall be the boundary between the United States and the Indian tribes: provided they stipulate that it shall run throughout unto the River Mississippi— And You may stipulate that any white persons going over the said boundary without a licence from the proper officer of the United States may be treated in such manner as the Indians shall think proper13— You will use every possible endeavor to ascertain who are the real Headmen & Warriors of the several tribes, and who have the great- est Influence among them; these Men You will attach to the United States by every means in Your power.— Every exertion must be made to defeat all confederations and com- binations among the tribes, and to conciliate the white people inhab- iting the frontiers towards them.— Cha8 Thomson secy 10 Gen. Richard Butler. 11 This clause does not appear in the original committee report. » Ante, p. 12. ■ See art. 5, treaty of Fort Mcintosh, Jan. 21, 1785, in Kappler (ed.), Treaties, ii, 6-8; 7 Stat. 16-18; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 11. In these various editions there are numerous textual changes from the original, which is in the archives of the Department of State.
Page 80
80 TERRITORIAL PAPERS INDENTURE BETWEEN THE BOARD OF TREASURY AND THE AGENTS OF THE OHIO COMPANY [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:CM] [New York, October 27,1787] This Indenture made the 27th day of Octr in the year of our Lord 1787 Between Sam1 Osgood, Walter Livingston and Arthur Lee Esq" (the Board of Treasury for the United States of America) acting by and under the authority of the Honble the Congress of the said States of the one part and Manassah Cutler and Winthrop Sargent both of the commonwealth of Massachusetts as agents for the directors of the Ohio Company of Associates so called of the other part. Whereas the Congress of the United States afsd in and by their several resolutions and votes 16 of the 23 & 27th days of July last16 past did authorise and empower the Board of Treasury afsd to contract with any person or psons for a grant of the tract of Land in the said resolutions mentioned upon such terms and condit"8 for such consideraons and under such reservations as in the said Resolutions is expressed and whereas by vir- tue and in consequence of the said resolutions and votes the said par- ties of the first part have contracted and agreed with the said parties of the second part agents as aforesaid for a grant of the Tract of Land herein after mentd Now therefore this Indre witnesseth that the sd parties of the first part in order to carry their said agreement as far as possible into effect and for and in consideraon of the sum of 500,000 Dollars well and truly paid into the Treasury of the sd United States by the sd parties of the second part before the Ensealing and delivery of these presents the rect thereof the sd Board of Treasury do hereby acknowledge, and thereof and of and from every part & parcel thereof do hereby on the behalf of the said United States acquit release exon- erate, and for ever discharge the said Parties of the second part and the said Ohio Company of Associates and every of them their and every of their Heirs Executors Admors & Assigns for ever by these presents, and also in consideration of the further Sum of 500,000 dol- lars secured to be paid as hereinafter is mentd Have in the behalf of the said United States and the Congress thereof covenanted & agreed and do hereby Covent & agree to and wtE the said parties of the second part their Hre & Assigns that within one month after the payment of the sd las mentioned sum of 500,000 dollars in the manr hereinafter prescribed a full and ample Grant and Conveyance shall be "Printed in Hulbert, Recs. Ohio Co., I, 29-37, from the original records of the company. The text here presented, from the copy in the Senate files, differs from the Hulbert text as to spelling, punctuation, capitalization and in other particulars. 1« "notes" in Hulbert. 1«Ante, pp. 54, 63.
Page 81
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 81 executed in due form of Law under the seal of the sd United States whereby the people of the said U. S. or the Congress thereof or such officer or officers as shall be duly authorized for that purpose shall grant convey and assure to the said parties of the second part their Heirs and Assigns for ever (as Agents to the directors of and in trust for the psons composing the said Ohio Company of associates according to their several rights and interests under the said Association) and to their Hrs and Assigns for ever as Tenants in common in ffee simple, all that certain tract or parcel of Land begining at the place were the western Boundary line of the 7th range of Township laid out by the authority of Congress intersects the Ohio and extending thence along that River southwesterly to the place where the western line of the 17th range of Townships to be laid out according to the Land ordinance of the 20th day of May in the year of our Lord 1785 17 would intersect the said river and extending thence northerly on the western boundary line of the said 17 range of Townships so far that a line drawn due east to the western boundy line of the sd 7th range of Townships will with the other Lines of this tract include one million and an half of acres of Land besides the sev1 Townships, Lots and parcels, of Land hereinafter mentioned to be reserved or appropriated to the specific purposes thence running east to the western bounds of the seventh range of townships and then southerly along those bounds to the place of begining with the rights members & appurtenances thereof which said tract shall be surveyed by the Geographer or some other officer of the said United States to be authorised for that purpose who shall plainly mark the sd East & west line and shall render one compleat plat or Map of the said tract to the Board of Treasury of the United States for the time being or such other person as Congress may appoint and another plat or Map thereof to the said parties of the second part their Heirs or Assigns Pro- vided always and it is hereby expressly stipulated that in the said Grant so to be executed as aforesaid a proper Clause or Clauses shall or may be inserted for the purpose of reserving in each Township or fractional part of a Township which upon such surveys as hereinafter are mentioned shall be found to fall within the bounds of the Tract so to be granted as aforesaid Lot, number 16 for the purposes mentioned in the said ordinance of the 20th day of May in the year of our Lord 1785 Lot N° 29 to be appropriated to the purposes of Religion and Lots N° 8. 11. & 26 for the use and subject to the disposition of the Congress of the U, S, and also reserving out of the said tract so to be granted two compleat Townships to be given perpetually for the purposes of an University to be laid off by the said parties of the 2d part their Heirs and Assigns as near the centre as may be so that the same shall be of Good Land to be applied to the intended "Aide, p. 12. 126640—34 7
Page 82
82 TERRITORIAL PAPERS object in such manner as the Legislature of the State wherein such Townships shall fall or may be situated shall or may think proper or direct and the sd parties of the 2d part do hereby for themselves and the directors and Ohio Company of Associates afsd and every of them & their & every of their Hrs Exors Admors & Ass covenant and grant to and with the sd Parties of the first part their Hrs Exore & Admors (acting as afsd for & on behalf of the said U. S. by virtue of the authority so as afsd to them delegated & assigned) that within the space of 7 years from & after the outlines of the said Tract shall shall have been so as afsd run out by the Geographer or other Officer of the U. S. to be for that purpose appointed and the plat thereof given as afsd (if they are not prevented by incursions or opposition from the Savages, or if they are so prevented then as soon as the same can be thereafter conveniently accomplished) the sd directors and Ohio Company of Associates or some of them their or some of their Heirs or Assigns shall and will cause the said Tract of Land so to be surveyed laid out and divided into Townships and ffractional parts of Townships and also subdivided into Lots according to the directions and provisions of the Land ordin" of the 20th day of May 1785 issued by Congress and shall or will make or cause to be made compleat re- turns of such divisions & subdivisions to the Treasury Board of the U. S. for the time being or such other person or persons as Congress shall or may appoint and also shall and will within one month after the outlines of the said Tract shall have been so as aforesd surveyed well and truly pay or cause to be paid into the Treasury of the sd U. S. the sum of 500,000 dollars in Gold or silver or in Securities of the sd U. S. without fraud or further delay and in as much as it was the true intent and meaning of the sd parties to these Presents and of the Congress of the U. S that the sd Ohio Compy of Associates should immediately cul- tivate if they thought proper a part of the sd Tract of Land propor- tional to the payment which they have so as afsd already made and should have full security for the undisturbed enjoymt of the same Now this Indre further witnesseth that the sd parties of the first part by vir- tue of the power and authority to them given by Congress as afsd have covenanted promised and agreed and do hereby Coven^_promise and agree to and with the said parties of the 2d part their Hrs and Assigns that it shall and may be Lawfull for the sd Ohio Company of Associates so called their Hrs & Assigns to enter upon take possess" of cultivate and improve at their pleasure in trust for the said Ohio Company of Associates their Heirs and Assigns all that certain Tract or parcel of Land part of the Tract hereinbefore described begining at the place where the western Boundary Line of the said 7th range of Townships intersects the Ohio, thence extending along that River South westerly
Page 83
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 83 to the place where the western Boundary Line of the 15th range of townships when laid out agreeable to the Ordinance aforesaid would touch the said River thence running Northerly on the Western bounds of the said 15th Range of Townships till a line drawn due east to the western boundary line of the sd 7th range of Townships will comprehend with the other boundary lines of this Tract 750,000 Acres of Land besides the several Lots and Parcels of Land herein after mentioned to be reserved or appropriated to particular purposes thence running East to the western boundary Line of the said 1th range of Townships and thence along the said line to the place of begining with the Rights Members and Appurtenances thereof according to the terms of the said Associacion Reserving always and excepting out of the said Tract last mentd and the permission to cultivate the same in each Township and fractional part of a Township which shall fall within the same ac- cording to the Land Ordinance herein before mentioned Lot N° 16 for the purposes specified in the sd Ordinance Lot N° 29 for the purposes of Religion, Lots N° 8. 11. & 26 subject to the disposition of the Con- gress of the U. S. and also reserving and excepting two compleat Town- ships for the purposes of an University to be laid off in the manner herein before mentioned and to be applied in such manner to that ob- ject as the Legislature of the State wherein the sd Townships shall fall or be situated shall or may think proper to direct and the sd parties of the first part do hereby for and on the behalf of the sd U. S. promise and agree to and with the sd parties of the 2d part their Heirs and As- signs that the sd Ohio Company of Associates their Hrs and assigns shall and may from time to time and at all times hereafter freely and peaceably hold and enjoy the said last mentioned Tract of Land except- ing the said Lots and parcels of Land and Townships so as aforesaid excepted provided that the Covenants and agreem" herein before con- tained on the part of the said parties of the second part are observed performed & fulfilled and the said parties of the first part do hereby pledge the faith of the U. S. to the said parties of the 2d part their Heirs and Assigns and to the said Ohio Company of Associates so called for the performance of all the Grants promises and agreements herein be- fore contained which on the part of the sd parties of the first part or of the said States are or ought to be kept and performed In witness whereof the sd parties to these presents have interchangeably set their hands and seals and the sd parties of the first part have caused their seal of office to be hereunto affixed the day and year first hereinbefore mentioned.18 "See act of Apr. 21,1792,1 Stat. 257-258, confirming the contract and author- izing the President to convey to the Ohio Company 750,000 acres, the portion
Page 84
84 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Sealed and Delivered (signed 19 in I Winthrop Sargent—L. S the presence" " | Manassah Cutler—l. s not signed — — L. s — — L. s — — L. S of the words "part" in the 6th line "five Hundd thousand Dollars secured to be." in the 17th line and "line of" in the 29th line of the first Skin being first written upon erazures and the words "several" in the 23d line of the same Skin, being first interlined, and the words "with" in the 24th line and "at all" in the 44th line of the 2? Skin being written upon erazures and the words "part" in the 2d line, and "surveyed" in the 17th lines of the said skin being first interlined.20 Staats Morris J Hardy Signed.— [Endorsed] L 1" Sess: 3d Con: Indenture between the board of Treasury & the agents of the Ohio company. October 27th 1787. Copy paid for at the time of entering into the contract. See also ordinance of July 23, 1787, ante, p. 54, wherein the Board of Treasury was authorized to contract for the sale of a much larger tract, extending from the mouth of the Scioto to the western boundary of the seventh range of townships and from the Ohio to the northern boundary of the tenth township, estimated at the time to contain 3,500,000 acres. Subsequent surveys showed it to contain 4,901,480 acres. This resolve of Congress was in accordance with the proposals of Parsons and others, of July 21, 1787, ante, p. 52, although it was a much larger tract than the Ohio Company was willing to engage to purchase. It was understood, however, that the Ohio Company was to have 1,500,000 acres, and that William Duer and associates, a group which included Sargent and Cutler, were to assume a joint responsibility for the remaining portion of the tract, on which an option had been given by Congress on July 23. Two days after the contract printed above was made, a transfer of one-half interest in the residue (of the original preemption) to Duer and others was effected. The text of this transaction is printed in Belote (ed.), "Selections from the Gallipolis PEpers", Quar. Pub. Hist. and Phil. Soc. Ohio, n, 43-46. See map in Peters, Ohio Lands, p. 161, delineating the preemp- tion tract of July 23, the grant to the Ohio Company, Oct. 27, and the so-called first purchase as described in the act of Apr. 21, 1792. "The original is signed by Samuel Osgood and Arthur Lee (Hulbert, Recs. Ohio Company, I, 37). ,0 The foregoing explanations do not appear in the Hulbert text.
Page 85
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 85 INDENTURE BETWEEN THE BOARD OF TREASURY AND MANASSAH CUTLER AND WINTHROP SARGENT FOR THEMSELVES AND THEir ASSOCIATES [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:C] [October 27, 1787] This Indenture made the 27to day of October in the year of our Lord 1787 between Samuel Osgood Walter Livingston and Arthur Lee Esq" (the Board of Treasury for the U. S. of America) acting by and under the authority of the Honorable the Congress of the said States of the one part, and Manassah Cutler and Winthrop Sargent both of the commonwealth of Massachusetts Bay for themselves and their associates of the other part21 Whereas the Congress of the U. S. afsd in and by their several resolutions and votes of the 23d & 27th days of July last past did authorise_and empower the Board of Treas- ury aforesd to Contract with any Pson or Psons for a Grant of a tract of Land which shall be bounded by the Ohio from the mouth of the Sioto to the intersection of the western boundary of the 7th range of Townships then surveying thence by the sd boundary to the Northern Boundary of the 10th Township in the sd range thence by a due west line to the Scioto and thence by the Scioto to the place of begining, upon the Terms for the considerations, and subject to the reservations and exceptions in the sd resolutions specified And whereas the sd Board of Treasury have pursuant to such resolutions agreed to con- tract with the sd parties of the 2d part for the sd tract of Land part thereof they as agents for the Directors for the Ohio Company of Associates so called have actually contracted for by an Indre bearing equal date with these presents and it is intended that the residue thereof shall be included in the contract hereinafter contained Now this Indre witnesseth that the said parties of the first part pursuant to and by virtue of the Resolutions of Congress afsd & for and in con- sideration of the several payments to be made and agreements to be performed by the said parties of the second part or their Associates as herein after is mentioned Have covenated promised and agreed and Do hereby in behalf of the said U. S. covenant promise and agree to and with the said parties of the 2d part and their Heirs and assigns for themselves & associates that the sd U. S. or the Congress thereof or such Officer or Officers as shall have sufficient authority for that pur- pose shall and will as soon as the same shall be surveyed in the manner hereinafter specified by the Geographer or other Officer of the U. S. and the sd parties of the second part shall have paid Half a million of 21 See Sargent to the inhabitants of Gallipolis, Nov. 23, 1792, post, p. 417.
Page 86
86 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Dollars in the manner hereinafter prescribed and stipulated well and effectually grant and convey in the usual and proper manner to the said parties of the second part their Heirs & Assigns for themselves and Associates 750,000 acres part of all that certain Tract or parcel of Land begining at the mouth of the Sioto on the Eastern side there- of thence running along the Ohio to the place where the Western boundary line of the 17th range of Townships to be laid out accord* to the Land ordinance of Congress of the 20th day of May 1785 will touch the same river, thence running Northerly on the Western boundary line of the said 17th range of Townships as far as the West- ern Line of the sd Tract so as afsd contracted for by the sd parties of the second part as agents for the Directors of the Ohio Company of Associates shall or may extend thence due east to the western boun- dary line of the sd 7th range of Townships, thence along the same to the Northern boundary of the 10th Township from the Ohio, thence due west to the river Sioto, and thence along said river to the place of beginning being the whole of the said tract mentioned in the sd res- olutions of Congress to be contracted for except what is contracted for by the sd hereinbefore mentioned IndTe and shall and will upon every of the sd remaining payments being made execute such further grant as afsd for a further proportional part of the said tract so that the whole shall be compleatly granted when the last payment hereinafter mentd is entirely accomplished Provided always that the land to be comprized in each of the sd Grants shall be laid out in one contiguous spot and provided also that in every such Grant or conveyance so to be made as aforesd a proper clause or clauses shall and may be inserted and contained for reserving & excepting out of the sd tract of Land in each Township and fractional part of a Township which according to the said Land Ordinance shall fall and be comprehended within the said tract hereby contracted for. Lot N° 16 to remain perpetually for the purposes specified in the said Ordinance, Lot N° 29 for the pur- poses of Religion and Lots N° 8. 11. & 26 subject to the future dis- position of Congress Excepting also and reserving further out of the said tract hereby contracted for the Township of Gradenhutten, Schoenboren and Salem in the Muskinghum and a quantity of Land to be laid out and adjoining to each of the said Towns with the build- ings and improvements thereon amounting in the whole to 10,000 acres round each of the said Towns to be vested agreeable to the res- olutions of Congress in the Moravian Bretheren at Bethlehem in Pennsylvania or a Society of the sd Bretheren for civilizing the Indians and promoting Christianity if the sd Townships or any of them shall fall or be situated within the bounds of the Tract hereby con- tracted for and the said parties of the first part do hereby further Covenant promise and agree as aforesaid in behalf of the sd U. S. to and with the sd parties of the second part their Heirs and Assigns for
Page 87
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 87 themselves and their associates that as soon as may be after the execu- tion of these presents the Geographer or some other Officer of the U. S. shall survey the said Tract hereby contracted for and ascertain the contents thereof and render one compleat Plat or Map thereof to the Board of Treasury of the sd U. S. for the time being or such other Offi- cer or Officers as shall be duly authorized to receive the same and another to the said parties of the second part their Heirs and Assigns— And the said parties of the second part for themselves their Hrs and Ass9 and their associates do hereby covenant promise and agree that they their Heirs or Assigns or their Associates or some of them shall and will well and truly pay for the sd Tract of land hereby contracted for such sums in Gold or Silver or securities of the U. S as the quan- tity of Land comprized in the sd tract after deducting the several parts excepted as afsd shall amount unto at 2/3d" of a Dollar Pr Acre (an allowance of 1/3"1 of a dollar being made from the sum of a Dollar Pr Acre agreeable to the said resolutions of Congress for bad Lands and incidental charges.) and that at the several times following that is to say one sixth part of the said sum at the expiration of 6 months from the time of the said Platt or map being delivered and the con- tents of the said Tract ascertained as afsd one other Sixth part thereof at the expiration of one year from the delivery of the said Platt and the contents of the said Tract being ascertained as afsd—one other Sixth part thereof at the expiraon of 18 months from the delivery of the said Platt and the contents of the said Tract being ascertained as afsd one other sixth part thereof at the expiration of two years from the delivery of the said Platt and the ascertaining of the said Contents of the sd Tract as afsd one other Sixth part thereof at the expiration of two years and Six months from the delivery of the said Platt and the ascertaining of the Contents thereof as afsd and the remaining Sixth part thereof at the expiration of 3 years from the delivery of the said Platt and the ascertaining the contents of the same Tract as afsd to which payments if made in securities of the U. S only the principle Sums therein specified shall be applied they the said parties of the second part agreeing to take Indents for the interest that may be due upon the said Securities according to the resolutions of Congress afsd Provided always and it is hereby agreed that in all the Securities wch may be paid on account of the respective installments aforesd the interest wch may have accrued on on the same after the date of the completion of the survey shall be allowed and paid to the United States and provided also and the true intent and meaning of these presents and of the parties thereto is that one seventh part of the said payments may be made in rights for Bounties of Lands by rendering the same Acre for Acre if the said parties of the 2d part their Heirs or Assigns or their Associates are disposed so to do And the said parties of the 2d part do hereby further Covenant & agree as aforesaid that
Page 88
88 TERRITORIAL PAPERS within 7 years after the completion of the said General survey of the same tract unless the incursions or Hostilities of the Savages shall prevent it or as soon after as those circumstances will permit the said parties of the 2d part their Heirs or Assigns or their Associates or some of them shall and will survey and lay off or cause to be surveyed or laid off at their own expence the whole of the same Tract hereby con- tracted for into Townships and ffractional parts of Townships and subdivide the same again into Lots according to the Land ordinance of the 20th day of May 1785 made and issued by Congress and shall and will make or cause to be made compleat returns thereof to the Board of Treasury of the U. S. for the time being or such Public Offi- cer or Officers as shall be duly authorised to receive the same And for the punctual performance of this Contract in all things on the part of the sd U. S. or of Congress to be done and performed the said parties of the first part do hereby pledge the faith of the United States to the said parties of the second part their Heirs and Assigns and their associates in the fullest and most explicit manner In witness whereof the parties to these presents have interchangeably set their hands and Seals and the sd Parties of the first part have caused their Seal of Office to be hereunto affixed the day and year first hereinbefore mentioned. . (Manassah Cutler l.s s1gned not signed WlNTHROp SARGANT L.S L.S L.S L.S Sealed and Delivered in the presence of the words "Resolution & Votes" in the 6th line "in every" in the 31" line, and "part of a town- ship" in the 33d line of the first Skin and "or" in 6th line of the 2d Skin being written upon erazures and the words "shall" in the 7th line and "manner" in the 20th line of the first Skin being first inter- lined and the words "for themselves & associates" in the 4th and 5th lines of the first skin written upon an erazure. Staats Morris . , J.Hardy | fflgned [Endorsed] L. 1" Sess: 3d Con: Indenture between the Board of Treasury and the agents of the Ohio company October 27th 1787 22. (Copy.) M The endorsement is incorrect: the contract was between the Board of Treasury and Cutler and Sargent.
Page 89
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 89 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. ill, fol. 23 :C »] Philadelphia Janv. 27.1788. Sir It is now near four weeks since I returned from Fort Pitt, and ere this should have waited upon you in person had I not been pre- vented by a slight indisposition while the daily expectation of being able to do so made me decline writing. I saw Gen1 Butler at Carlisle in my way to the westward; but it was the 12th of December, when I was on the return, before I met with him in that Country; the weakness of his leg, and sickness in his family had hindered him from proceeding earlier. The intelligence respecting the disposition of the Indians that I was able to obtain at Fort Pitt was not very satisfactory—indeed it amounted to little more than that they had been extremely anxious to see some persons with authority from the United States to treat with them—that, in that expectation, and in consequence of a request they had made to that purpose, there had been a considerable assem- bly on the Tawa River,24 but their expectations not having been ful- filled, it had been concluded to send one other Message to Congress, and to wait four months for an Answer. The Deputy for Indian Af- fairs at Fort Pitt had forwarded the Message to the Superintendant without taking a copy so that I had not so perfect an opportunity as I could have wished to judge of its spirit. I have however taken meas- ures to be informed of what passed at that meeting, and to get proba- bly at the bottom of their designs which with them as well as more civilized nations, are not always what they are professed to be, and about the 1" of March I expect to be possessed of it.—From all ac- counts however there is a great deal of uneasiness amongst them, and it is clear to me that, if it cannot be removed, a very general War will ensue. Whether that uneasiness can be removed I own, I think doubt- ful, for though we hear much of the Injuries and depredations that are committed by the Indians upon the Whites, there is too much reason to believe that at least equal if not greater Injuries are done to the Indians by the frontier settlers of which we hear very little.—It was notwithstanding my decided opinion that the treaty ought to be made, and in that opinion Gen1 Butler perfectly coincided; and the falls of Muskinghum is fixed upon for the place of treaty, and Invitations 25 Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 40-42, with the textual altera- tions usual in that edition. There is a rough draft in the Ohio State Library, which differs materially from this copy, and a copy made by Peter Force, which also contains variations, is in the Force Transcripts (LC). The document sent has not been found, but the copy from which the above text is taken was sent by the Secretary at War to Congress and must be presumed to be the most accurate copy extant. "Either the Ottawa or the Maumee.
Page 90
90 TERRITORIAL PAPERS have been sent by the Superintendant to the different nations to meet us there on the first of May next, a point of time that was supposed to be as early in the season as they could attend at, and a place more equally convenient to them, and us, than any other they would agree to.—It is about seventy miles from the mouth of the river and navi- gable for boats to the spot. The mode I think of for managing the Treaty is this—that the Goods be deposited in the Fort at the mouth of the river while Gen1 Butler and myself meet the Indians at the Falls.—Should the business come to a favorable issue they can easily be brought up and distributed,—If it does not come to a favorable issue they are in safety. I have great reason to expect that the meeting will be very numer- ous, and it is therefore to be regretted that the Finances of the United States would not permit a more liberal appropriation of money,26 more especially as the objects are very important in many points of view, and that they are frequently receiving very great presents from the British—last autumn Six thousand pounds sterling in money, under the Idea of a compensation for losses sustained by them in the late war, and Goods to an equal value were distributed among them by that Nation,29 and notwithstanding the advice they receive from Lord Dorchester to remain at peace with the United States, there can be little doubt that the jealousies they entertain and the uneasinesses which agitate them, are fomented by the Agents of that Crown. It was a great disappointment that I could not avail myself of the liberty you were pleased to grant to open any letters from Gen1 Harmar to you which I might meet with on the way—The intelligence they must have contained, would have determined me as to the neces- sity of inviting the Nations upon the Wabash. I saw at Fort Pitt Lieutenant Smith who had been with Gen1 Harmar in that Country, but could get nothing from him that was satisfactory, and therefore concluded it would be proper to invite them and they have accord- ingly been invited—their distant situation however renders it prob- able that they will not come in numbers. On the whole Sir, it appears to me from every view I could take of this subject, and every Information that I have been able to obtain that the proposed Establishments in the Country north west of the Ohio, and the further sale of lands there for the discharge of the public debt depend entirely on a solid Peace with the Indians.—to effect that 25 A total of $34,000, of which $20,000 was to be applied towards the extinguish- ment of Indian claims to lands already ceded to the United States, and for purchasing other lands beyond the limits fixed by treaty {Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 828). 26 Aug. 15, 1787, the British Government expended £18,985 for presents to the Indians in Canada and the Northwest, and in 1788 £25,013 (Chatham Papers, Public Record Office, GD 8/346). I am indebted to Dr. Katharine Crane for this citation.—Ed.
Page 91
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 91 no pains will be spared on my part, yet after all that can be done un- less the Inhabitants of the States that border upon them can be re- strained from acts of violence and injustice towards them, it can never be of long continuance. A General Indian War, while it would involve thousands in the most extreme distress, would be attended with such an expence as our present situation would render highly unadviseable. I have the honor to be with great respect Sir Your most Obedient Humble Servant. (signed) Ar Sl Clair. The Honh1" Major General Knox Secretary at War. [Endorsed] N° 6. SECRETARY SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] Boston, the 17th of February, 1788. Dear Sir, I heard by the Post of the 13th inst., that your Excellency was in York, which determined me immediately to be there, and I made my arrangements accordingly; but a letter last night from Gen- eral Knox, which informed me that you had left the City, and would not go into the Western Country until April, has induced me to post- pone my journey so that I may be present at the meeting of the Ohio Company in Providence on the first Wednesday of March. I con- ceive it will be my duty, and I assure you it is very much my inclination to accompany your Excellency if agreeable; and you will favour me with information of your departure. I have obtained from the Secretary's office in this Commonwealth copies of Civil and Military Commissions, Passports, &c., &c. &c., some of which I intended to have printed in this town from my own finance, but General Varnum 27 observed to me, that your Excellency and all the Judges would probably be together in York in this Month, where we should have it in our power to draw on the publick funds, and that it might be your pleasure to make some material alterations in the forms, which has hitherto prevented me from doing any thing in the business. With your Excellency's advice and instruction I will (if you think proper) attend to it in New York, where I shall be by the 15th of March. Military Commissions and Civil Commissions for the Peace will, I presume, be very essential at an early period, and perhaps others. 27 James Mitchell Varnum, lawyer (Trevett r. Weeden), brigadier general in the Revolutionary Army, and delegate in Congress from Rhode Island, 1780-1782 and 1786-1787. In 1787 he was appointed by Congress one of the three Judges for the Northwest Territory; he died in Marietta in 1789 (Biog. Cong. Direct., 1913, p. 1077).
Page 92
92 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Publick Seal can be cut in New York or Philadelphia, and I shall, if your Excellency will favour me with order and a device, apply to an Engraver without delay. If there be any services within my ability, officially, or in a private character that I can render your Excellency, I wish you to command me with the greatest degree of freedom. I have the honour to be, my dear Sir, with very high respect and esteem, your most obedient and humble servant, W. Sargent. EXPLANATORY MEMORIAL FROM POST VINCENNES AND THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [LC:CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 123: ADS] [February 28, 1788] To the Honorable the Congress of the United-States of North-America The french inhabitants of Poste Vincennes on the Wabash; Kaskas- kia, Cahokia, Prairie du rocher, & village Sl Philipp in the Illinois country, impressed with the most respectful confidence that thenr respective Petitions, praying for a gift of five hundred acres of land to every male inhabitant, will be favorably regarded by the Honorable the Congress, beg leave further to elucidate their situation & the ob- jects of their demands.28 The inhabitants of Poste Vincennes possess, Since the epocka of their first settlement, a Common pasture-ground for their cattle, under one fence, of about two miles in depth & eight miles in front, two thirds of which are ponds & impracticable morasses. A few among them took up, under the authority of their former governors, small tracts in the woods of between eight & twelve acres in Superficies, where they used to make their sugar, & which, from that circumstance, they call their sugar-camps. All the farming lands which they have formerly obtained, besides their Common, do not amount to four, or at most, five thousand acres. Since the conquest made of that country by the State of Virginia, the Court has granted to every American adven- turer four hundred acres, subject to such regulations as might be made hereafter by Congress. Not half a dozen of the french have availed themselves of that opportunity of obtaining lands. Their Charter, or the cession made them by the Pianquicha 29 Indians in the year 1768 begins at Pointe coupee30 twelve leagues above the Poste by water, down to the mouth of White river twelve leagues below said Poste; and is to extend forty leagues to the Eastward & thirty to the West- ward which contains about eight millions of acres. 28 See ante, p. 72. !9 Piankashaw. 80 The abrupt bend of the Wabash River, about thirty miles above Vincennes.
Page 93
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 93 All the bottom from the mouth of the Kaskaskia river to Prairie du rocher, & from the hills along that river to the Mississipi has been long since apportioned by government to the inhabitants of these two villages, & contains from eighteen to twenty thousand acres; and, as the number of their male inhabitants is two hundred and Seventy, this gives Seventy four acres to every one of them, including their Common which is very extensive. The Deputy County-Lieutenant of this district,31 in conformity to the direction of Colonel Todd 32 appointed by the State of Virginia County-Lieutenant, has granted to some few Americans & french tracts of Eighty, One hundred & Sixty, and three hundred acres, subject to be hereafter controul6d by Con- gress. The Jesuits had at Kaskaskia a grant from the King of france of four Square leagues.33 The village of Cahokia is included within a grant of four square leagues made in the year 1742 by Mess" De Boisbriant & Desursins Commandants to the Missionaries of the order of Sl Sulpice.34 In 1768, the Bishop of Quebec & these fathers ceded to the inhabitants of Cahokia the usufruit of this grant.35 Within its bounds they have the few improvements they have made; and some concessions have been granted by their court to the Americans Settled at Grand- ruisseau,38 two leagues & a half from the village. The remainder of the Americans live on the intermediate Space between village St Philipp & the boundaries of the Cahokia Grant.37 from these premises it will appear why the inhabitants of Cahokia did not join with the other districts in giving up their Charter, because it is not immediately vested in them. The inhabitants of Poste Vincennes & the Several districts of the Illinois, in consequence of the above Statement, presume with dif- fidence to prayj "Richard Winston, appointed deputy in November, 1778. See Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), lxxxv. »2 Col. John Todd, lawyer, soldier in Dunmore's war; emigrated from Virginia to Kentucky in 1775 and served in the Virginia Assembly as a delegate from Kentucky; appointed by Governor Henry as county lieutenant in Illinois in 1778 {ibid., liii; Mason, ed., "John Todd's Record Book", Chicago Hist. Colls., VI). ** Sold Nov. 6, 1763, in pursuance of a decree of the Superior Council of Louis- iana, July 9, 1763 (Alvord and Carter, eds., Critical Period, IHC, X), 125-128. For an account of the Jesuit holdings in Kaskaskia, see id., New Regime (IHC.XI), 326-328; Carter (ed.), Corr. Gen. Gage, I, 94. M The original land grant to the Seminaire des Missions Etrangers at Cahokia was dated June 22, 1722 (Alvord, ed., Cahokia Recs., IHC, n, 593). "For the various changes in the former property of the Sulpicians, see ibid., 590-593, and id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 581-602. « Established in 1783 (id., Cahokia Recs., IHC, II, cxii). "The first purely American settlement in what is now the State of Illinois was at Bellefontaine, on the road between Cahokia and Kaskaskia, loc. cit.
Page 94
94 TERRITORIAL PAPERS That the five hundred acres of land, for which they have petitioned the Honorable the Congress, may be granted to them, exclusive of the small tracts they are already possessed of in virtue of concessions to them made, previous to the country being taken possession of by the State of Virginia. That it be ordered that all the grants made by the County-Lieu- tenant or his deputy, and by our respective courts, since we became subjects of Virginia, shall be confirmed to the respective Grantees; provided that so much as has been so conceded to them shall be part of what may be granted by Congress. That, in consideration of the poverty of the inhabitants, the fees of the Surveyors, employed in laying off the different tracts that may be granted to these districts, be paid by Congress. That, as an alleviation of our distresses & losses during these ten last years, the lands of the french inhabitants of these districts may be exempted from taxation for so long as it will please Congress to order it. That the lands to be granted to the french & American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes, on the Eastern side of the Wabash, begin at the upper opening of the false channel vulgarly called Le faux chenal, thence going up the Wabash, so that the depth from this river shall be one third of the length along said river, & include the whole quantity. That the boundaries of the lands to be granted to the french & American inhabitants of the different districts of the Illinois be from the mouth of the Riviere a Marie,38 up & along the Mississippi to the upper limit of the Cahokia Charter, along said limit to a North-& south- line that shall intersect an East-& West line from the mouth of the Riviere a Marie, so as to include the whole quantity. And finally, that the grants to the french be distinguish'd & separate from those to be made to the American inhabitants. New york february 28th 1788. By order & in behalf of the french inhabitants of Poste Vincennes & the Illinois39 Bartholomew Tardiveau Agent [Endorsed] N°4. 58 Marys River, in Randolph County, Illinois. *• The first report of the committee of Congress, Mar. 6,1788, in response to the various petitions from the inhabitants of Vincennes and the Illinois country, is printed in Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 465-466. This report was resub- mitted to the same committee on Mar. 27, ibid., p. 466, and a second and more elaborate report was made on May 5, post, p. 105, which was made the basis of the instructions to Governor St. Clair, Aug. 29, 1788, post, p. 146. See also report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 323.
Page 95
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 95 B. TARDIVEAU TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 103:ALS] [March 2, 1788] SiR I have the honor to transmit to Your Excellency Sundry papers which the french & American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes& the Illinois country have ordered me to lay before the Honorable the . Congress: They are numbered as follows; N° 1. the Petition of the french inhabitants of Poste Vincennes40 2. the Petition of the french inhabitants of the Illinois41 3 the Memorial of the french of Poste Vincennes & the Illinois42 4 the explanatory Memorial of the same43 5 A memorandum of articles given by the french of Poste Vin- cennes to the Indians to Stop a war-party.44 6 the Petition of the American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes45 7 the Petition of the Americans of the Illinois48 8 the powers given me by the french & Americans47 9 Numbers of the male inhabitants48 I have thehonor to be with thegreatest respect Sir Your Excellency's Most obedient Most humble Servant B: Tardiveau Agent for the french & American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes & the Illinois New-york March 2? 1788. [Endorsed] List of papers presented by Mr Tardiveau & referred with his letter of Feby 9th 1788 49 to Mr Wadsworth Mr Irvine Mr White—Read Feby 25th 1788 THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. m, fol. 101 :LS] War Office, March 10th 1788— Sir. I have the honor to submit to Congress, a report of the measures which have been adopted, in consequence of their directions of the *» July 26, 1787, ante, p. 58. « Sept. 15, 1787, ante, p. 72. « Feb. 28, 1788, CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 209. This is similar to other peti- tions and memorials. a Feb. 28, 1788, ante, p. 92. "Oct. 7, 1786, CC Papers, no. 48, fol. 127. » Aug. 7, 1787, ante, p. 66. "Aug. 27, 1787, ante, p. 68. « Aug. 27, 1787, in Alvord (ed.), Kask. Rets. (IHC, V), 440-445. *> In Illinois, exclusive of Cahokia, ibid., pp. 414-445. "Ibid., pp. 451-453.
Page 96
96 TERRITORIAL PAPERS 22'nd of October last,50 respecting the lands appropriated to satisfy the bounties due the late army of the United States, and also, to state some circumstances relative to claims for lands, by certain descrip- tions of officers, on which it may be necessary for Congress to decide. The numerous speculations, or transfers of the real and supposed claims of individuals, for lands, rendered it highly proper to ascertain the names of all persons originally entitled to lands, by the resolves of Congress. Accurate lists are therefore making out, at the office of the Commissioner of army accounts of all the legal claimants. The muster rolls from time to time are the only genuine means to guard against fraud in this case. The alphabetical lists which are forming from them are considerably advanced, and will probably be completed in three months. The work which is very voluminous will be important for other public objects than the one herein specified. I applied, early after Congress passed the before recited resolve of the 22'nd of October, to the Geographer to have the tract situated at the mouth of the Ohio surveyed—He expressed his readiness to direct the surveys, but required, as an indispensible preliminary, an advance of twelve hundred dollars, without which, the persons in the depart- ment could not undertake the business—The board of treasury, on a request for this sum, stated, that the situation of the treasury would not admit of any advance to the surveyor's department. Being desirous that the orders of Congress should be promptly executed in this respect, I suggested the expedient of the surveys being performed, under the direction of the Geographer, by some of the military officers on the Ohio—The board of treasury, and the Geographer agreeing with me in the propriety and oeonomy of the measure, I directed Brigadier General Harmar to appoint suitable officers to survey the exterior lines of the tract, at the junction of the Ohio, with the Mississippi, according to the mode which should be pointed out by the Geographer 61—I stated explicitly, that for this service the officers were not to expect any compensation. But I informed him that the tracts would be divided into lots, and that for the surveys of such lots as should have been alienated by the persons originally entitled, a reasonable price would probably be fixed, by which the officers would be compensated for their trouble in making the surveys. I humbly presume, that it is the intention of Congress, that the officers and soldiers possessing their own rights to land should have the quantity to which they are respectively entitled, surveyed and delivered to them free of all expences whatever. M Ante, p. 76. « See "Proposition of Thomas Hutchins", June 29, 1787, ante, p. 30. For location of army lands, see reprint of map from Jedediah Morse's Amer. Geog., in Winsor, West. Movement, pp. 364-365.
Page 97
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 97 But, as a very great proportion of the persons originally entitled, have transferred their claims to Speculators for inadequate considera- tions, the public are not obliged perhaps to survey and deliver such lands free of all expence. Were the whole quantity due the late army to be surveyed into lots of the sizes stipulated, the cost of the surveys would probably exceed the sum of one hundred thousand dollar[s,] a sum, far exceed- ing the public ability to furnish for the object—As this is a point on which the decision of Congress may be considered as necessary, the following resolve is submitted. Resolved, That all officers and soldiers of the late army of the United States, possessing their rights to the bounty lands stipulated by the resolves of Congress, shall have the quantity to which they are respectively entitled, surveyed and delivered to them without any expence what- ever—That the army rights to lands which may have been alienated, be charged only with the actual expences of surveying the same.62 A mode for the distribution of the lands will be formed and hereafter submitted to Congress.63 Some doubts have arisen whether the officers who were deranged in 1778 and 1779 were entitled to lands:—But I presume a recurrence to the original resolve on this subject of the 16'th of September 1776,64 will fully establish their right—It is there stipulated that lands shall be granted "to the officers and soldiers who shall engage in the service, and continue therein until the end of the war, or until discharged by Congress, and to the representatives of such officers and soldiers as shall be slain by the enemy" An officer who resigned, and voluntarily quitted the service was clearly precluded from land and other emoluments—But in the case of a derangement by Congress, he is entitled to all the stipulations made previously to his discharge—The officers who were discharged in 1778 and 1779 received one year's pay in a depreciated paper as a gratuity, but there were not any resolves of Congress which deprived them of the lands. Some doubts have also been suggested respecting the lands which have been alienated since the war by the officers and soldiers orig- inally entitled—The preamble of the resolve of Congress of the 20'th of September 177666 precluded the sale of the lands only during the war, and the resolve founded thereon ought not to have a more extensive construction—The resolve itself, however seems to preclude any assignment without limitation of time—But as this could not probably 42 See endorsement and editorial note thereon. n See "Supplement to the Land Ordinance of 1785", post, p. 122. M Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), V. 763. ■ Ibid., p. 788. 12M50—34 8
Page 98
98 TERRITORIAL PAPERS have been the meaning of Congress the assignments clearly made since the war will be considered as valid, unless it should please Congress otherwise to direct. Should the mode herein suggested for the survey of the outlines of the tract at the mouth of the Ohio, meet with the approbation of Congress the outlines of the reserved tract north of the purchase of Cutler and Sargent could also be surveyed by the same means:56 And if a discrimination could with propriety be made between unalienated and alienated lots, so that the latter should be charged with a reasonable price for the expence of surveying, the whole of the army lands might be delivered to the persons entitled thereto, without any expence to the public. I have the honor to be Sir with the highest respect Your Excellencys Most obedient humble Servant H Knox His Excellency The President of Congress [Endorsed] Letter 10 March 1788 Secy at War Read 12th Referred to Mr Clarke Mr Thatcher Mr Gansevoort Mr Dane Mr White dis- charged 16 July 1788 Aug. 28. 1788 Referred to Mr Clark Mr Carrington Mr Dane Reported—Sept 23d 1788"— GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE BOARD OF TREASURY [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair"] New York, March [14] 1788. Gentlemen, I have the honour to return you enclosed the Warrant upon the State of Pennsylvania for one thousand dollars which you were pleased to furnish me with for the purposes of the Indian treaty, immediately on my arrival in Philadelphia. I presented it to the Receiver of Continental taxes there, who informed me that, if the Treasurer of the State would make the payment he would instantly do what was necessary on his part. I made application to the Treasurer, who said he could pay no monies on any account, without the orders of the Executive Council, and at any rate he could not pay one farthing in specie, nor could he devise any means of procuring specie, other than that the Council should empower him to sell as much paper as would raise the sum mentioned in the Warrant. I then addressed the Council, and stated to them as an inducement for M See map, Winsor, West. Movement, p. 365. w CC Papers, no. 190, Comm. Bk. Repts., p. 204. Not noted in the Journals. M There are two copies in the Force Transcripts (St. Clair), one without signature, the second with signature but without day. Differences in punc- tuation sufficient to change the meaning are found in the former copy. The original has not been found.
Page 99
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 99 their compliance, the very great interest the State had in the event of the proposed Treaty with the Indians. They would do nothing in the matter, but as the Assembly were to meet in a few days, &c., desired that I would not return the Warrant then, and that my letter to them should be laid before the House. That was done, and a Committee to whom it was referred reported that they could devise no means for the payment, which report was adopted. As that money is essentially necessary, indeed the business cannot go on without it, I have to request that the Board will furnish it in some other way. Every thing else that is necessary has been procured and sent forward to Fort Pitt. I have the honour, &c. Signed, Arthur St. Clair. The Honourable Board of Treasury. B. TARDIVEAU TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC:N. W. Terr. Papers :ALS] [March 20, 1788] Sir The french and American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes & the Illinois take the liberty to address Your Excellency as their natural patron & protector, and humbly hope that the love of justice & benev- olence by which you are so eminently characterize will induce You to afford them that Support which their respect prompts them to look for in the paternal affection of Your Excellency. They have had the honour to present to Congress Several Petitions & Memorials, tending to obtain five hundred acres of land for every male inhabitant of their respective districts;69 and flatter themselves that this demand will meet with the gracious compliance of that Honorable Body. But it may perhaps happen that they might think proper to put off the final decision of this business untill Your Excellency has taken up his resi- dence in this country of which we are happy to hear that you have been appointed Governor. Should such a delay be likely to take place, we beg leave to acquaint Your Excellency with our fears, and to sollicit your Honorable mediation to the end that the hopes we have pre- sumed to conceive may not be blasted by the event. We understand that Your Excellency is going to hold a treaty with the Northern Indians: that will in all appearance detain you two or three months; the journey to Poste Vincennes & from thence to the different districts of the Illinois, the organization of Your Government in those Several parts of it, the time necessary to obtain the information which you may wish to transmit to Congress, and the long interval that Shall elapse before your dispatches can reach that Honorable Body; all "Ante, pp. 58, 66, 68, 72, 92.
Page 100
100 TERRITORIAL PAPERS these circumstances put it beyond any doubt that it will be the Spring next year before they Shall receive them. A Congress composed of new members will have at that time succeeded the present one, and there will be a necessity of going thro' the whole business over again. And if their attention was taken up with matters of greater moment, such as the establishment of the New Constitution, as it is probable it Shall, our interests, it is to be fear'd, will be laid aside. During that period, which will be lengthened by our uneasiness & apprehensions, lands may be Sold by Congress, and not unlikely those very lands that join us. Where, then, shall we take refuge? What remedy shall we Seek from distress and poverty? If we dar'd to Surmise that Con- gress have no other motive for that delay than a desire of Knowing who, among the American Settlers, is entitled to a gift of land, we wou'd offer it as our humble opinion that the Charter, if Congress are pleas'd to grant us one, might be express'd in a manner that wou'd exclude all illegal claims, by giving [blank] Hundred acres to every American who had resided in these districts before the 1" of March 1784 at which epocha the State of Virginia ceded this country to Congress. Confident, Sir, that Your Excellency's paternal heart will feel a pure Satisfaction at having it in your pow'r to signalize the first deed of your government by an act of benevolence, and at observing at your landing that gratitude will be the first Sentiment that shall meet you, we humbly intreat Your Excellency to deign to Support the weak efforts of our Agent in our behalf. With the most profound respect, we have the honor to be Sir Your Excellency's Most obedient most humble Servants in behalf of the french & American inhabitants of Poste Vincennes & the Illinois B: Tardiveau Agent New-york March 20th 1788. His Excellency Governor St Clair REPORT OF THE SECRETARY AT WAR: INDIAN AFFAIRS [LC:CC Papers, no. 151, fol. 339:DS] [March 31, 1788] The Secretary of the United States for the Department [of] War to whom was referred a letter of the 11th of March 1788 40 from the Superintendant of Indian affairs for the Northern district.— Reports, That it is to be regretted that every arrangement of military posts for the protection of the frontiers is exceedingly defective compared with the importance of Niagara and Detroit. •» CC Papers, no. 151, fol. 335, copy.
This page contains an image.
Page 101
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 101 That by the said posts being unjustly with-held from the United States, they are not only constrained to make inadequate establish- ments for the defence of the frontiers but are subjected to excessive expences by being obliged to transport all their supplies upwards of three hundred miles by land. That untill the United States are in possession of said posts not only the before recited evils will be continued, but it is to be appre- hended no solid peace can be effected with the Indians. That the opinion of the Superintendant with respect to the estab- lishment of posts at the Miami Village and at Cayahoga would be well founded were existing circumstances favorable to the plan. That posts being established at said places must depend on one or the other of the following circumstances—Either the Indians must sincerely concur in the measure, or the posts and garrisons themselves must be so strong, and possess such communications, as to bid defi- ance to the force of the Indians. To attempt the establishment of small posts far advanced into the country in the present irritated temper of the Indians would most probably accelerate a war which it is highly the interest of the United States to avoid. A post of five hundred men being established at the Miami Village at the rapids of the Miami river,61 which runs into Lake Erie, would be highly advantageous to the Indian trade and the security of the frontiers. But the said post ought to be supported by others so as to have a free communication by the way of the Wabash, as well as Lake Erie. Should the Indians at the ensuing treaty receive favorably the prop- osition, a considerable post might this year be established at Caya- hoga river, which runs into Lake Erie—Should they be averse to the design it must be deferred.—For the troops on the frontiers will be too much reduced to attempt the establishment by force—and it is uncer- tain whether the Treasury will be able to furnish money to recruit others to supply their places. The average number of troops on the frontiers during the present year will not exceed three hundred and fifty, unless exigencies should arise to induce the States to furnish the public treasury better than otherwise it will be. Hence it will appear that any capital alteration of the posts will depend on the issue of the ensuing Indian Treaty combined with other causes. Your Secretary will request early information of the Commissioners with respect to the dispositions of the Indians on this point, which with "Maumee River.
Page 102
102 TERRITORIAL PAPERS any propositions arising therefrom shall be submitted to Congress for their decision. All which is humbly submitted. H Knox War Office March 31" 1788. [Endorsed] 31l March 1788. Report Secy at War—on letter March 11th 1788 from Super-Intdt of Indian Aff" respecting the western Posts Entd read 5 May 178882 MEMORIAL TO CONGRESS FROM JUDGES PARSONS AND VARNUM [LC:CC Papers, no. 41, vol. VIII, fol. 242 :LS] [April 8, 1788] To the honorable the Congress of the United States. Samuel Holden Parsons and James Mitchel Varnum, two of the Judges appointed for the Western territory, humbly represent, that they have exhibited to the Accountant in the Treasury office, certain claims by them respectively made. Should those claims appear in- admissible, without a special order, they beg the attention of your honorable body to the reasons they have assigned in their support.— The facts stated, they verefy upon their honor. The conclusions from those facts, they submit, with great deference, to your decision.— Bound by the strongest principles of attachment and gratitude, they shall be happy only in the prosperity and glory of the United States. April 8th. 1788. Samuel H. Parsons James M. Varnum. [Endorsed] N. 54. Memorial to Congress. by S. H Parsons J M. Varnum—Read 23 June 1788.—June 24 Referred to the board of treasy to report Acted on July 9th 1788—83 THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Charles Thomson Papers :D] New York April 11. 1788 Dear Sir, Upon my arrival here I found a letter from Mr Etwein64 enclosing one for you which I forward herewith. He informs me that "See also report of Knox, May 2, 1788, infra. « Post, p. 124. w Mar. 26, 1788, Thomson Papers (LC). John Ettwein was a Moravian mis- sionary who was instrumental in 1785 in securing from Congress a reservation of
Page 103
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 103 the letter to you is from the Agents for the Missions of the United brethren, in behalf of the remains of the Christian Indians who were driven from Muskingum. Such is my Confidence in your humanity that I am sure they will not plead in vain. I beg leave to submit to your consideration how far it may proper to quiet the minds of the Delaware in Respect to the mournful Slaughter of their friends & rela- tions on the Muskingum & to remove from their thoughts every idea of its being a measure of Government & whether it might not be well, in case they bring forward a complaint on this account to inform them how much the act was disapproved of by Congress and what pain it gave them that the Nations who were at war with us should have been the cause or given pretext for the detested deed, by opening a war path through the towns of those innocent people & previously removing them to Sandusky I hoped to have had the pleasure of seeing you in Philadelphia, but when I called I found you were gone to visit your family. I heartily wish you success in your Negotiations, & happiness in the administra- tion of your government, Always with sincere respect Dear Sir Your most obedt & Most humble Servt To Govr St Clair REPORT OF THE SECRETARY AT WAR: INDIAN AFFAIRS [LC:CC Papers, no. 151, fol. 343 :DS] [May 2, 1788] The Secretary of the United States for the department of war, to whom was referred a letter of the 14'th of March 1788,65 from the Governor of the Western territory, Reports;68 That the confederation of a large number of tribes of Indians, to oppose the settlement of the lands, North of the river Ohio, is a sub- ject of great importance, and seriously claims the attention of the United States. That the said tribes of Indians have expressed the highest disgust, at the principle of conquest, which has been specified to them, as the basis of their treaties with the United States, and in consequence of 12,000 acres in the Tuscarawas Valley for converted Indians. In 1787 he revived the Society of United Brethren for Propagating the Gospel among the Heathen (Diet. Amer. Biog., IV, 190-191, art. by L. H. Gipson). « Cf. St. Clair_to the Secretary of War, Mar. 14, 1788, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 43. M See also report of the Secretary at War, Mar. 81, 1788, ante, p. 100.
Page 104
104 TERRITORIAL PAPERS which, the limits of their hunting grounds and territory, have been circumscribed and defined.67 That the practice of the British government, and most of the North- ern colonies previously to the late war, of purchasing the right of the soil of the Indians, and receiving a deed of sale and conveyance of the same, is the only mode of alienating their lands, to which they will peaceably accede. That to attempt to establish a right to the lands claimed by the Indians, by virtue of an implied conquest, will require the constant employment of a large body of troops, or the utter extirpation of the indians. That circumstanced as they are at present, being in alliance with, and favorably treated by, the British government, the doctrine of conquest is so repugnant to their feelings, that rather than submit thereto, they would prefer continual war. That the principle of waging war for an object which may be ob- tained by a treaty, is justly to be questioned. That at the ensuing treaty, it is highly probable, the indians will, in the first instance object to the right of the United States to the country North of the Ohio. If the Commissioners, who are to hold the treaty, are bound by instructions to adhere rigidly to the principle of conquest, and the limits of territory stated at the former treaties, an abrupt de- parture of the Indians, and hostilities in consequence thereof, may be expected. Your Secretary humbly apprehends that the United States may conform to the modes and customs of the indians in the disposal of their lands, without the least injury to the national dignity. Were an opposition to the custom of the indians in this respect to be a mate- rial part of national character, it would not be highly estimated in the opinion of the world. But, your Secretary conceives that the Commissioners may nego- ciate an extinguishment of the indian claims, to the territory described by former treaties, and perhaps to the further extension defined in the instructions to the Governor of the Western territory without calling in question the validity of the said treaties—In case of a new purchase, or the modification of the former boundaries, a sum of money may be given according to the indian custom, on the chiefs signing the deeds in the usual form. "See treaties of Fort Stanwix, Oct. 22, 1784, Fort Mcintosh, Jan. 21,1785, and the Shawnee treaty, June 31, 1786 (Kappler, ed., Treaties, U, 5-8, 16-18; 7 Stat. 15-18, 26-27; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I,10-12). The original treaties in the archives of the Department of State differ, in some instances materially, from the printed texts cited above. For congressional action preparatory to negotiations with the western Indians, see Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), Xxv, 680-695, xxvi, 152-155, XXVII, 407-408, 433-434, 466, 552-554, 581, 599, xxvill, 172-173, 405, 431. An original account of the negotiations leading to the treaty with the Shawnee is found in General Butler's journal, printed in Craig (ed.), Olden time, pp. 512-522.
Page 105
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 105 As an extensive indian war in the present political crisis, and with an exhausted treasury, would be an event pregnant with unlimited evil, your Secretary submits, with all deference, the consideration of the propriety of so modifying the instructions to the Governor of the Western territory, and the Superintendant of Indian Affairs, as to ad- mit of their extinguishing, by purchase, the indian claims to the West- ern country, described in the former treaties, with such additions, as the said commissioners shall be able to effect. That the sum to be given, for the complete extinguishment of the indian claims to the said country, be limited to the sum of forty thou- sand dollars. That one third of the said sum be paid in money, or goods, on the signing of the deeds at the ensuing treaty; one third, in the year 1789; and the remainder, in the year 1790; to be delivered on such days in the years aforesaid, and at such places, as shall be mutually agreed on. All of which is humbly submitted to Congress. H Knox [Endorsed] 2 May 1788. Report Secy at War on letter March 14th 1788 from Govr of the Western territory—& papers enclosed of Indian Affairs—Entd read 2 May 1788 May 15 Referred to Mr Dane Mr Irvine Mr S. M Michell Mr Carrington Mr Browne report of Comm" passed July 2d 1788 68 REPORT OF COMMITTEE: PETITION FROM POST VINCENNES AND THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [LC:CC Papers, no. 19, vol. VI, fol. 5: AD] [May 5, 1788] Mr Wadsworth, Mr Irvine and Mr White The Committee to whom was referred the petition of the French and American Inhabitants of Post St Vincents and the Illinois 69 by their Agent Mr Tardiveau beg leave to report that as there is much uncertainty about the possessions of the Inhabitants of the Country upon the Wabash and Missisippi Rivers, and the Quantities of Land that they may be entitled respectively to hold and enjoy by rights acquired before they became subjects of the United States, in order to quiet their minds, to maintain them on their just rights, and extend to them the liberality of the United states they Submit the following resolutions viz— Resolved that the Governor of the Western Territory shall cause to be surveyed and laid out, as soon as may be a tract of land upon the 48 Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 828. M Feb. 28, 1788, ante, p. 92.
Page 106
106 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Wabash River bounded in the following manner to wit70—beginning at the place where the River a Maries falls into the Wabash and run- ning thence east eight miles—thence north to the Southern boundary line of a tract of land lately agreed for by the Board of Treasury with Messrs Flint & Parker;71 thence with that line to the Wabash and across the same twenty miles thence due north so far as to meet a due west line drawn from the point of beginning—Also one other tract of land upon the Mississippi bounded in the following manner viz. begin- ning at the mouth of the wood River and running with the southern boundary line of a tract of land lately agreed for by the Board of Treasury with Messrs Flint & Parker to the Kaskaskias River thence Southerly untill it meets the Mississippi at the mouth of the River au Vase—thence with that River to the place of beginning and in- cluding all the Islands in that river near to the eastern bank of the same—which two tracts of land will contain and circumscribe all the settlements made by the ancient French Inhabitants, except such as may have been within the Tract agreed for with Flint & Parker upon the Illinois River, & the rights of each as may have been settled therein and provided for by the agreement with them— Resolved—that the Governor of the Western territory shall cause as soon as may be, due enquiry to be made into the claims to lands of the Inhabitants of the Country upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers, and where it shall be ascertained either by Records that have been preserved in the Country or by authentic writings in the Posses- sion of the parties claiming which may not have been recorded that lands may have been granted to any of the said Inhabitants by the french Government, or conceded to them by the military officers in command there from time to time—or by the Intendant or other civil officer of that Crown who may have been entrusted with the distri- bution of lands he shall Provided the the Quantity expressed in such grant does not exceed four hundred acres, on the application of the said Inhabitants respectively or of their Heirs or legal Representa- tives, cause the same to be surveyed and laid out, agreeably to the descriptions in the said Writings & Records contained, at their own proper Costs and charges—and shall grant letters patent under the seal of the Government and Counter signed by the Secretary confirm- ing the same to the said Parties and to their Heirs and Assigns forever, to the Inhabitants of the Country upon the Wabash the Lands to be laid out in the tract upon the Wabash—and to the Inhabitants of the Mississippi in the tract upon the Mississippi72— And whereas it may be that persons may have acquired equitable Titles to lands under some peculiar Customs established and recog- 70 See Governor's instructions, Aug. 29, 1788, post, p. 146. 7 1 Oct. 22, 1787, ante, p. 77. "See Governor's instructions, Aug. 29, 1788.
Page 107
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 107 nized in the ancient French Colonies where no actual grants have passed in that Case Resolved that the Governor of the Western terri- tory wherever it shall be made satisfactorily to appear by any of the Inhabitants of the Countries upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers—or by the Heirs or legal Representatives of any persons who have heretofore been inhabitants of the same—that they or their Pred- ecessors respectively had acquired equitable or Customary rights to Lands shall cause to be surveyed for each on their applying for the same, and at their Proper Costs and Charges four hundred acres of Lands within either of the beforedescribed Tracts of Land, in that upon the Wabash for the Inhabitants upon the Wabash—and in that upon the Mississippi for those upon the Mississippi—and issue letters Patent under the seal of the Government granting the same to the individuals and to their Heirs and Assigns forever73 And whereas the Country upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers was by the treaty of Paris 1763 ceded to the Crown of Great Britain and grants of land may have been made to Individuals inhabiting there by the officers of that Crown Resolved that the Governor of the Western territory shall cause like enquiries to be made as in the cases of the ancient French inhabitants and order the lands to be surveyed and laid out for them respectively within the bounds of the before described tracts of Lands, and under the same limitations and restric- tions Issue letters Patent confirming the same to them and their Heirs and Assigns respectively forever— And whereas from the conquest of the Country upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers untill the Cession made by the State of Virginia to the United States the same was under the Government and domin- ion of that State, & many persons may have removed during that period into the said Country and have acquired legal or equitable Titles to lands, under the laws or Customs of Virginia Resolved that the Governor of the Western territory shall cause due enquiry to be made into the same and upon the same being ascertained: to order the lands to be surveyed and laid out for the Persons claiming the same their Heirs or legal representatives within either of the before described tracts of Land, and Issue letters Patent confirming them, to them, and their Heirs and Assigns forever under and Subject to the same Regula- tions limitations and restrictions as are prescribed in the Case of the french and English Inhabitants— And whereas it may be that within the boundaries of the before described Tracts of land upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers after all the claims of the inhabitants, whether legal or equitable—to any quantity of Land—not exceeding four hundred acres for each— shall have been satisfied there may yet remain an over plus—Resolved that the Governor of the Western Territory may, and he is hereby 73 See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 40.
Page 108
108 TERRITORIAL PAPERS empowered and directed upon application to order the same to be surveyed and laid out for any person or persons in quantities not ex- ceeding four hundred acres for each applicant and to Issue letters Patent, granting and confirming the same to the said applicants re- spectively and to their Heirs and assigns for ever they paying for the same at the rate of [blank] pr acre—any thing in the powers to the board of Treasury to dispose of western territory notwithstanding, out of which powers the before described tracts of Land upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers are hereby expressly excepted. Resolved that where the Claims to Lands of the Inhabitants of the Country upon the Wabash and Mississippi Rivers—whether legal or equitable do not amount to four hundred acres for each—the Governor of the Western territory may and he is hereby empowered at the request of the Parties—to grant to the Parties a quantity in addition that shall make up four hundred acres for each Inhabitant and pro- vided that in all cases where the Claim exceeds that Quantity he shall report the same with all the Circumstances attending it to Congress for their Decision—And to the end that the business may be con- ducted with safety and propriety as well for the United States as for the Individuals interested. Resolved that the Governor shall erect an office where all persons claiming lands under Grants from the Crown of France the Government of Great Britain or the State of Virginia shall present the same or authentic Copies of the Records, where the same may have been preserved and from which warrants of survey shall Issue to the Surveyors to be appointed to lay out the same, which surveyors before they enter upon the execution of their offices shall take an Oath or Affirmation of fidelity to the United states, and for the due and faithfull execution of their Offices respec- tively before they enter on the same which Warrants together with Plotts of the tracts of land shall be returned to & filed in the said Office, before any Patent shall Issue—and in all Cases where equi- table Titles shall have been ascertained the Governor shall certify the same, under his hand and seal to the party—which certificate shall be recorded in the said Office and warrants of survey Issued thereupon and return of the warrants together with the Plotts of the land be returned and filed before any Patent for the same shall Issue— And the secretary of the Government shall make return once in every three months to the Secretary of Congress of all warrants Issued by the Governor in pursuance of the foregoing Resolutions— [Endorsed] No 3. Report—Mr Wadsworth Mr Irvine Mr White on Petition of Inhabitants of Sl Vincennes & Illinois byMr Tardiveau Agent—delivd March 31"—1788 Entd read May 5. 1788 friday 9 May Order of Day 74 74 The printed broadside of the report (CC Papers, no. 19, vol. vi, fol. 7) bears the following endorsement: "Report of Tardiveau's Mem1 in behalf of
Page 109
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 109 REPORT OF THE BOARD OF TREASURY:75 MEMORIAL OF GEORGE MORGAN [LC:CC Papers, no. 138, vol. n, fol. 173 :DS] [May 22, 1788] The Board of Treasury to whom was referred the Memorial of George Morgan 70 and his Associates for the Purchase of a Tract of Land in the Illinois Country. Beg leave to refer Congress to their Report of the 18th March 1788 77 on the application of J. Woods and Garret Rapelje of the [blank] It is necessary however to observe, that the principles of that Report (so far as they relate to the probability of the execution of the Propos- als of Mess" Woods and Rapelje) are in a great degree invalidated, by the respectable association, in whose behalf the present Memorial is presented; the private property of the parties, being we presume fully adequate to a compliance with their proposed Contract. Under the above circumstances, the Board are of opinion, that it would be adviseable to enter into a Contract with Mr Morgan, and his asso- ciates, on the same terms, as have been agreed on, on the application of Royal Flint and Joseph Parker; should Congress judge it adviseable (previous to the termination of the approaching Treaty) to enter into any further Contracts for Lands, where the Indian Title has not been extinguished.— With respect to the application of the Memorialists on the Form of Government which they wish to be Established, within the proposed Purchase; the Board forbear to make any observations as they pre- sume this Object (being of a positive nature, and not necessarily con- nected with the Business of their Department) was not intended by Congress to form part of the subject in Reference.— All of which is humbly Submitted. Samuel Osgood Walter Livingston Arthur Lee 22d May 1788. Wabash & Illinois settlers delivered 5 May 1788 June 26 Referred to Mr William- son Mr Dane Mr Clarke Mr Tucker Mr Baldwin who are likewise to prepare instructions to the Gov of the W territory for his conduct in the measures to be taken by the U. S." The report of the committee, in two parts dealing respec- tively with the Vincennes and Illinois areas, was presented to Congress on Aug. 29 (CC Papers, no. 30, fols. 157 and 501), and is embodied in the resolutions and instructions to the Governor entered on the Journals on that date, post, p. 146. 75 Letter of transmission, May 22, is in CC Papers, no. 140, vol. I, fol. 511. 7t May 1, 1788, printed in Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 469-470. "CC Papers, no. 38, fol. 273.
Page 110
110 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [Endorsed] 104. Report of Board of treasury on mem1 G Morgan Entd Read 23 May 1788 Referred to Mr Williamson Mr Dane Mr Carrington Mr Kearny Mr Wingate see Journal June 20th 178878— REPORT OF THE BOARD OF TREASURY: SALE OF LANDS [LC:CC Papers, no. 139, fol. 689 :DS] [May 26, 1788] The Board of Treasury to whom it was referred to report to Congress the State of such Contracts as they have made for the sale of Lands in the Western Territory. Beg leave to Report That the Resolves of Congress of the 23d 79 & 27th 80 July 2d81 and 22d 82 of October last relative to Contracts for Lands in the Western Territory all stand on the same principles; Except in one article of the Agreement proposed to be made with Mess. Flint and Parker;83 by which the United States stipulate to extinguish the Indian Title, in- stead of the same being done by the Contractors agreeably to their proposition. That no Contract has been completed in consequence of the Resolves of Congress above stated; except with Messrs. Sarjeant & Cutler:84 the Board not conceiving themselves authorised to conclude any Con- tract, till the first installment is paid on the respective purchases. That assurances have been given to the Board of the intentions of Mr Symmes, and of Messrs. Flint and Parker to fulfill their proposed Contracts; except in the case of the Two Million Acre Tract on the Wabash—which the Attorney of Mr Flint in this City informs the Board cannot (he presumes) be complied with for want of a sufficient number of subscribers to complete the Purchase.— With respect to that part of the proposed Contract with Messrs. Flint and Parker; which differs in the point we have suggested from the other propositions—Congress will observe that it necessarily arises, from the Indian Title to the same riot being extinguished; which is not the case of the other proposed Contracts; and consequently that the "Post, p. 112. n Ante, p. 54. 80 CC Papers, vol. 190, Comm. Bk. Repts., pp. 154-156; Journals Amer. Cong., IV, app., 18. 81 Report of committee on petition of John Cleves Symmes (CC Papers, vol. 190, Comm. Bk. Repts.). There is no entry in the Journals of the Continental Congress. "Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 801. The reference is to reservations for military bounties. 85 Oct. 22, 1787, ante, p. 77. "Oct. 23, 1787, ante, p. 78.
Page 111
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 111 agreement with Messrs. Flint and Parker (should it take effect) will stand precisely on the same grounds with those abovementioned. All which is humbly submitted Samuel Osgood Walter Livingston Arthur Lee May 26th 1788. [Endorsed] 51. Report of board of treasy state of sales of Western terry Read May 26. 1788—Referred to Mr Williamson Mr Dane Mr Carrington Mr Kearny Mr Wingate not reported REPORT OF COMMITTEE: BOUNDARY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND NEW YORK AND MASSACHU- SETTS [LC:CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 603 :D] [June 6, 1788] The Committee consisting of Mr Clark, Mr Irvine, Mr Armstrong Mr Wadsworth & Mr Brown to whom was referred a Motion of Mr Irvine, Submit the following Resolution Resolved, That the Geographer be directed to ascertain by himself or a deputy duly appd for the purpose the boundary line between the United States and the States of New York and Massachusetts agreeably to the deeds of cession of Said States— That the Geographer inform the Executive of the States of New York and Massachusetts of the time of running said Line in order that they or either of them may if they think proper have persons attending at the time.84 That the said Geographer or his deputy having run the said Me- ridian Line between Lake Erie and the State of Pennsylvania, and marked and noted down in his field Book proper Land Marks for perpetuating the same, shall proceed to make a Survey of the Land lying West of said Line between Lake Erie & the State of Pennsyl- vania so as to Ascertain the quantity thereof, and make return of such Survey to the Board of Treasury, who are hereby Authorized and impowered at any time before or after such Survey to sell the said Tract, either in whole at private Sale for a price not less than % of a dol. per Acre in Specie or publick Securities drawing Interest, . . .88 [Endorsed] No. 5 Report of Mr Clark Mr Irvine Mr Armstrong Mr Wadsworth Mr Brown for ascertaining the Western Boundary of Cessions from N. York & Massachusetts Entd read 6. March 1788. passed June 6. 178887 Motion Mr Irvine enclosed. ■* See commission for survey, Sept. 1, 1789, post, p. 213. M Here follow a few lines which are crossed out. "Journals Amer. Cong., Iv, 820-821.
Page 112
112 TERRITORIAL PAPERS REPORT OF COMMITTEE: MEMORIAL OF GEORGE MORGAN [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [June 20, 1788] The com"" consisting of Mr Williamson Mr Dane Mr Carrington Mr Kearny and Mr Wingate to whom was referred a memorial of George Morgan 88 and his associates respecting a tract of land in the Illinois country on the Mississippi having reported thereon and their report being amended to read as follows89 "That there are sundry french settlements on the river Mississippi within the tract which Mr Morgan and his associates propose to pur- chase.90 Near the mouth of the river Kaskaskies, there is a village which appears to have contained near eighty families from the begin- ning of the late revolution. There are twelve families in a small village at la prairie du rochers, and near fifty families at the Kahokia village. There are also four or five families at fort Chartres and St Philips which is five miles farther up the river. The heads of fam- ilies in those villages appear each of them to have had a certain quan- tity of arable land alloted to them and a proportionate quantity of meadow and of wood land or pasture. Your Committee are of the opinion that from any general sale which may be made of the lands on the Mississippi there should at least be a reserve of so much land as may satisfy all the just claims of the ancient settlers on that river and that they should be confirmed in the possession of such lands as they may have had at the beginning of the late revolution, which may have been allotted to them according to the laws or usages of the govern- ments under which they have respectively settled. And whereas an additional quantity of land may be necessary for the suport of those people whenever the settlement shall encrease, and the indian trade, by which they have chiefly subsisted shall become less profitable, your com"" are of the opinion that such allowance should also be made to them within the reserved limits. Your Committee observe that in the contract which is already made for the sale of a tract of land in the Western country, the purchasers are to be charged with surveying three lots which are reserved for the benefit of the United States. They conceive that future contractors may be relieved from this ex- pence, but they would propose that every agreement hereafter to be made shall be equally binding on the contracting parties, whereupon they submit the following resolves 88 May 1,1788, printed in Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 469-470. Another memorial by the same persons, May 15, 1788, is also printed, ibid., p. 471. 89 The original report of the committee is in CC Papers, no. 19, vol. iv, fol. 145. The changes are unimportant. m See memorial of Tardiveau on behalf of the French inhabitants, July 8, 1788, objecting to this report, in Alvord (ed.), op. cit., pp. 485-488.
Page 113
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 113 That the board of treasury be authorized to contract with any per- son or persons for a grant of a tract of land, which shall be bounded as follows Beginning on the rive Au vase in the parallel of latitude of the mouth of little Wabash river, thence running due north to the parallel of latitude which passes through the mouth of Wood river, thence west to the Mississippi at the mouth of Wood river, thence down the river Mississippi to the mouth of the river Au vase, thence up the said river to the place of beginning, under the exceptions and reservations herein after mentioned. That the purchaser or purchasers shall oblige themselves to lay off the tract at their own expence into townships or fractional parts of townships, & to divide the same into lots according to the land ordi- nance of the 20th May 1785,01 compleat returns of which are to be made to the board of treasury. The lot N 16 in each township or fractional part of a township to be given perpetually for the purposes contained in the said Ordinance; and the lot N 29 in each township or fractional part of a township to be given perpetually for the purposes of religion; and that each of the several townships shall be thus laid off before the original purchaser or purchasers shall have disposed of the same or made any settlement therein. The price to be not less than two thirds of a dollar per acre for the contents of the said tract, except the reser- vations and gifts herein mentioned, payable in specie, loan office cer- tificates reduced to specie value, or certificates of liquidated debts of the United States; the principal only of the said certificates to be received in payment; And the board of treasury, for such interest as may be due on the certificates, rendered in payment as aforesaid, prior to the first day of January 1787, shall issue indents for interest to the possessors which shall be receivable in payment as other indents for interest of the existing requisitions of Congress; and for such interest as may be due on the said certificates between that period and the time of payment the board shall issue indents, the payment of which to be provided for here after. That part of the purchase money, not less than one hundred and fifty thousand dollars shall be paid down upon the closing of the contract, and the remainder of the purchase money, whenever the indian claim shall have been extinguished and the boundary line of the tract run by the geographer of the United States or his assistant, the contents of the land which is to be sold ascer- tained and a plot of the same returned to the office of the treasury board; on which payment a grant shall be made and the purchaser or purchasers shall have the right of entry and occupancy. That separate tracts shall be reserved for satisfying the claims of the ancient settlers which shall be included within the following boundary, viz. A straight line to be extended from the mouth of the little river Marie below the river Kaskaskies to the old French fort on the east Ante, p. 12. 128850—34 9
Page 114
114 TERRITORIAL PAPERS side of the said river Kaskaskies and opposite the Kaskaskie village, thence north three miles; thence west across the Kaskaskies river to the ridge of rocks and high land, which extend from the Kaskaskies to the Illinois rivers; then along the west side or foot of the said ridge of rocks and high land to the parallel that runs two miles north of the church at Kahokia; thence west to the river Mississippi; thence down the said river to the mouth of the river Marie. That measures be immediately taken for confirming in their posses- sions] and titles the French & Canadian inhabitants and other set- tlers on those lan[ds,] who on or before the year 1783 had professed themselves citizens of the United States or any of them, and for laying off the several tracts which they rightfully claim within the described limits;92 and for laying off for the benefit of the said inhabitants three additional tracts adjoining the several villages Kaskaskies, La prairie du rochers & Kahokia, in th[e] form of a parallelogram, ex- tending from the river Mississippi eastward to the ridge of rocks before described & of such extent as shall contain four hundred acres for each of the families now living at either of the villages of Kaska- skies, La prairie du rochers, Kahokia, fort-Chartres or St Philips. The additional reserved tract adjoining the village of Kaskaskies shall be for the heads of families in that village; the tract adjoining La prairie du rochers for the heads of families in that village; and the tract adjoining Kahokia for the heads of families in that village, as also for those at fort Chartres & Sl Philips. Such additional dona- tions of four hundred acres each to be distributed by lot & immediate possession given; Provided nevertheless that no person thus obtain- ing possession of such donation lands shall have power to alienate the same, until he or she, or his or her heirs shall have resided at least three years from the time of such distribution, within that district; at the end of which period every such resident shall obtain a title to the reserved lot and all lots not thus conveyed to residents shall revert to the United States That whenever the French & Canadian Inhabitants & other set- tlers aforesaid shall have been confirmed in their possessions and titles & the amount of the same ascertained, and the three additional parallelograms for future donations and a tract of land one mile square on the Mississippi, extending as far above as below fort Chartres & including the said fort, the buildings & improvements adjoining the same, shall be laid off; the whole remainder of the soil within the reserved limits above described shall be considered as ap- pertaining to the general purchase, and shall be conveyed accordingly. n See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 40; St. Clair to the Secretary at War, June 14, 1788 (Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, n, 115-117); instructions to St.Clair, Aug. 29, 1788, post, p. 146; act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339.
Page 115
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 115 That measures be immediately taken to extinguish the Indian claim, if any such exists, to the land bordering on the Mississippi from the mouth of the Ohio to a determined station on the Mississippi, that shall be sixty or eighty miles north from the mouth of the Illinois river and extending from the Mississippi as far eastward as may be. That the governor of the western territory be instructed to repair to the French settlements on the Mississippi at and above the Kas- kaskies. That he examine the titles and possessions of the settlers as above described in order to determine what quantity of land they may severally claim, which shall be laid off for them at their own expence; and that he take an account of the several heads of fam- ilies living within the reserved limits, in order that he may determine the quantity of land that is to be laid off in the several parallelograms, which shall be laid off accordingly by the geographer of the United States or his assistant, at the expence of the United States.93 That the geographer of the United States be instructed to take the latitude of the mouth of the river Au vase, and the mouth of Wood river, and of the northeast and southern angle of the tract; and that in executing all other large surveys he take the latitude of three or four of the chief corners."94 Resolved That Congress agree to the said report.96 REPORT OF COMMITTEE: THE UNITED LAND COMPANIES OF THE ILLINOIS AND WABASH [LC:CC Papers. no. 19, vol. VI, fol. 573: AD] [June 27, 1788] The Committee Consisting of [blank] to whom was referred the Memorial of James Wilson Esqr in behalf of Sundry persons calling themselves the United Land Companies of the Illinois and Wabash, report That the Memorial Represents that on the 5th day of July 1773, the Chiefs and Sachems of the Illinois Nations by their Deed, granted to the Several persons therein named, and who are since known by the name of the Illinois Company, two Several Tracts of Land therein bounded and described, on the East side of the Mississippi and in the Country of the Illinois.—And that on the 18th day of October 1775, the Chiefs and Sachems of the Several tribes of the Piankashaw M See committee report and resolution on memorial of Morgan, Aug. 28, 1788, post, p. 144, and act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339. M Read first on June 12, made the order of the day for Thursday, June 19, and acted on June 20. See endorsement on committee report, CC Papers, no. 19, vol. IV, fol. 145. See also Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 823-825. m For an explanatory act in regard to slavery, and for provisions in support of education and religion, see report of September, 1788, post, p. 149.
Page 116
116 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Indians by their Deed duly executed, granted to the persons therein named, and who are since known by the name of the Wabash Company two other several tracts of Land therein bounded and described Sit- uate on both sides of the River Wabash. The said Memorialist further Represents that if the said Purchases upon a full enquiry shall appear to have been fairly made with the Indians and Valuable considerations paid, the same will prevent the Necessity and expence of a Second purchase of the same Lands by the United States, in which case the companys wish not to Retain the whole of the said purchased Tracts, but think themselves entitled to at least a part thereof as a compensation for the money they have expended, the pains they have taken, and the time they have employed in this business. From which Statement your Committee beg leave to Remark, that altho the purchases above mentioned do not Appear to have been made at a general treaty with the Indians, or under legal Authority with all the formalities Customary to give validity to such a transac- tion; and however improper it may be in general to countenance private purchases from the Indians, yet, considering all Circumstances attending the purchases in question, in case the same upon full investigation shall Appear to have been fairly conducted, and that on Account thereof the United States will be ultimately benefited by an exemption from the expence of purchasing the same Lands, your Committee are of Opinion a Reasonable Compensation in Land should be made to the said companies.98 In Order therefore that Congress may obtain the information necessary to render justice in the Premises. the following Resolution is Submitted. That the Governor of the Western territory with the Superin- tendent of Indian affairs be directed to receive such information and documents, as the persons Stiling themselves the United Land Companies of the Ilinois & Wabash, shall think proper to furnish them with, respecting the Purchases by them Alledged to have been made of the Indians on the Rivers Mississippi and Wabash in the years 1773 & 1775. and at the Ensuing treaty to be held with the Indians make due enquiry into the same, and avail themselves thereof at said treaty so far as may be consistent with the Justice and Dignity of the United States, and Report to Congress a full State of their enquiry, and of their proceedings in Consequence thereof. [Endorsed] 124 Report of a Comittee on the Memorial of James Wilson Esqr in behalf of the United Land Companies of the Illinois and Wabash. Entd read June 27. 1788. Mr Irvine Mr M For validity of title held from Indian grant, see Johnson and Graham's Lessee v. William M'Intosh, 8 Wheaton, 543-605 (1823).
Page 117
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 117 Clarke Mr Dane Mr Mitchel Mr Carrington July 1. postponed— 3 See Mem1 W—see Memorials Wm Trent & associates—papers & filed in Iron chest—relating to Vandalia & Ilinois Comp.97 ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SF:1 Cong., 1 sess.:C98] —July 2—1788— Additional Instructions M to the Governor of the territory of the United States Northwest of the River Ohio, relative to the treaty to be held with the western Indians in pursuance of the resolutions of Congress passed in Octr last1— Sir, An additional Sum of twenty thousand dollars has been appro- priated for the purposes of procuring a permanent peace with the Indian tribes, with which You are authorised to hold a treaty. This sum of six thousand dollars out of the fourteen thousand heretofore appropriated for holding the said treaty are particularly directed to be applied solely to the purpose of obtaining a boundary advantageous to the United States, between them and the said Indian tribes, and for further extinguishing by purchase Indian titles in case it can be done on terms beneficial to the Union.2— But it is not expected that any further purchases of lands will be made unless on terms evidently advantageous to the United States, or that any part of the said additional sum will be expended, but in cases apparently necessary.— In fixing a boundary between the United States and the Indian tribes, instead of the East & West Line mentioned in Your Instruc- tions 3 You will endeavor to establish an East & West Line as far North as the completion of the forty first degree of North Latitude.— 97 See also ante, p. 115, and post, p. 353; Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xvm, 862, xix, 253, xx, 704-705, xxi, 784, 1032, 1057, 1058, 1098, 1113, XXII, 184, 191, 223-232, 240-241; A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 27, 72, 74-75, 160-161, 189, n, 108-120, 253; Annals, 2 Cong., 1 seas., 48, 112, 121, 247, 2 sess., 624, 628, 663, 4 Cong., 2 sess., 1530,1531, 1540, 1551-1552, 2063; Alvord (ed.), Illinois-Wabash Co. MS; Account Procs. III. and Ouabache Land Co. (Phil., 1796); Cal. Va. State Papers, I, 314. For the earlier history of the Illinois Land Company, see Alvord, Miss. Valley in Brit. Politics, II, 201-204; Carter, G. B. and the III. Country, 176S-177U, pp. 160-161, giving citations to original sources. •8 Printed in Secret Journals Cong., I, 278-279. The appropriation of funds only is recorded in the formal Journals. m Based on report of a select committee to whom was referred the report of the Secretary at War, May 2, 1788, ante, p. 103, and on a letter from St. Clair of Mar. 14, ante, p. 98. 1 Oct. 26, 1787, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 804. 2 Compare with resolution as passed, ibid., p. 828. 'Of Oct. 26, 1787, ante, p. 78.
Page 118
118 TERRITORIAL PAPERS In Your negotiations with the Indians You will make immediate payments so far as You shall have monies in hand, but in case You shall find it necessary to engage any considerable part of the said addi- tional sum You are to stipulate that the payments thereof be made in two or three equal annual installments, the first to be as late in the Year 1789 as can be obtained.— Cha" Thomson secy— [Endorsed] Entd in Book Reports & Communications Fol:1. Page 81. 18t Sess Ex. 1" Con. Instructions to Govr of West Territory THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers: ALS] War-Office July 3rt 1788 Sir I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the 11'th of May,4 on the 20'th of, June. I now inclose a resolve of Congress of the '2nd instant for, appro- priating a further sum of twenty-thousand dollars to the department under your direction, on the principles therein specified.6 I also inclose you the instructions of Congress for the appropriation of the same.6 As these papers are of the highest importance for you to possess as soon as possible I shall transmit them by the post to Philadelphia, and direct Mr Hodgdon 7 to forward them to you with all possible expedi- tion by express. It may not be improper for me to intimate to you the anxiety of Congress to hear from you in the present state of affairs, and of the dependance they place on your abilities, and that of the, Superintend- ent for quieting all disturbances among the indians. I feel great satisfaction, that Congress has been pleased to make this further appropriation, as I hope it will be the means of accom- plishing effectually the public expectations. I am Sir with the highest respect, Your most obedt and very humble Servt H Knox The Honorable The Governor of the Western territory. [Endorsed] War Office July 3d 1788 4 Not found. • Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 828. ■ Ante, p. 117. 7 Samuel Hodgson, quartermaster-general of the United States Army in the northwestern campaign of General St. Clair. Consult index, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n.
Page 119
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 119 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC: CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 493 :C] Pittsburgh July 5th 1788. Sir/ Since I had the honor to drop you a hasty line by General Irwine with the latest intelligence then from the Indian Country. Gen1 Butler has received a letter from the persons sent to invite the Indians dated the 14th of June a Copy of which I now enclose. It is not a little extraordinary that a meeting which was desired with so much earnestness by the Savages, should be attended with with so great delay on their part, after being consented to by Con- gress—I suspect indeed that concession has a little embarrassed them— they had probably been led to beleive that their request would not be complied with, and were determined on War, and tho that is an event some of the Nations, particularly the Wyandots, and part of the Delawares would wish to prevent, it is certainly ardently desired by many others; and I am far from being sanguine in the hope that the Commissioners will have it in their power to prevent it. The Western tribes have been so successful in their depredations on the Ohio River—their settlements are so distant, and their country so difficult, they imagine themselves perfectly safe; and as by these incursions they gratify at once their passions of avarice and revenge, and their desire for spiritous liquors, every boat carrying more or less of that commodity, few of them may be expected to attend; nor are they to be much depended on should they attend generally;—at this time however even a hollow peace, if better cannot be secured, is very much to be wished. The confusion that seems to prevail amongst the different tribes, might possibly be improved into a rupture, if the United States had proper persons amongst them, or that any of the Nations had much confidence in us, but neither of these is the case, nor do I think it ever will be the case.—Our settlements are extending themselves so fast on every quarter where they can be extended—Our pretentions to the country they inhabit has been made known to them in so unequivocal a manner, and the consequences are so certain and so dreadful to them, that there is little probability of there ever be- ing any cordiality between us—The idea of being ultimately obliged to abandon their country rankles in their minds, and our British Neighbours at the same time that they deny the cession of Country made by them, suffer them not to forget for a moment the claim that is founded upon it. Any Opportunity that may present itself either to sow the seeds of discord among them, or to cultivate a good understanding with them will be embraced, if it can be done without committing the United States.—There is another reason why the Indians have been so tardy and undecided about their meeting which has been supplied by the
Page 120
120 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Government of New-York—It may not be very proper for me to animadvert on the conduct of that or any Government; but it surely was very improper to call the six Nations to a meeting in that State,8 and as I have understood for State purposes at the very time they had been called to a different part of the country for general purposes, and in which that State as a member of the Union was equally concerned, and no meeting is of much consequence without these nation[s].—It has distracted them very much—they complain of it and say "they are called here and they are called there—One says here is the great Council Fire and to this you must come—another tells them there is the great Council Fire and there they must go, and a third tells them it is lighted up in a third place (that I understand is the land company that has been formed in that State to take leases of them) and they know not which to do, or whom to beleive, they feel themselves like drunken Men reeling from side to side and unable to fix themselves any where." and as they are naturally I had like to have said, not altogether un- justly, jealous of us, it has at this time encreased that natural jealousy. It seems however they are now on their way, and may be expected ere long. I have had the Provisions at the place appointed for a considerable time with a small party to take care of them, and a person to speak with any parties that might arrive; but these encrease the expences. Tomorrow I shall set out myself but shall not go farther than the Muskingum settlement until the six Nations arrive, and shall take every opportunity to inform you of every occurrence—But I cannot conclude this without expressing a wish that we were better prepared against hostilities which it is the general sentiment will certainly hap- pen, and which tho' I do not think them inevitable, are but too likely to take place I have the honor to be &c On the Messengers letter The Account of Mr Purviance being put to Death is contradicted by a Mr Mitchel who was taken the same day and has obtained his liberty and arrived at this place a few days ago. [Endorsed] Letter from Govr Western Territory 5 July 1788. Copy. 8 Based on information supplied to Harmar by Capt. Jonathan Heart at Fort Franklin, June 18, 1788, Harmar Papers (1W417), Wis. Hist. Soc.
Page 121
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 121 THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO THE PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. m, fol. 527:LS] War-Office, July 7th 1788. Sir. I have the honor to transmit to your Excellency, the following papers respecting the disposition of affairs on the Ohio, and to the North West of the same. N° 1—A letter from the Governor of the Western territory, dated Westmorland the 23'rd ultimo,9 and enclosing a message from the Wyandots, Ottawas and Chippawas, delivered by Captain Coon,10 dated Sandusky-rapids April 14'th 1788;11 and a letter from Mess" Wilson and Rankin of the 15'th April 1788.12 N° 2—A letter from the Superintendant of Indian Affairs for the Northern district, dated Fort-Pitt June 20'th 1788.13 N° 3—Extracts of a letter from Brigadier General Harmar, dated Fort Harmar June 15th u containing a report from Lieuten- ant Armstrong dated April 28'th 1788,16 and another from Lieutenant Spear dated the 2'nd June 1788 19— I have the honor, to be, With the highest respect, Your Excellency's Most obedt & very humble Servant— H Knox His Excellency The President of Congress. [Endorsed] Letter July 7th 1788 Secy at War—transmitting letters, copies June 23d Govr Wes" territory enclosing messages from In- dian Tribes & letter from Wilson & Rankin June 20th S: Ind" North" Sept June 19th Gen1 Harmar & reports of Ll Armstrong & Spear read July 7th 1788 Letter 7 July 1788 Secy at War—read 7 July [Attached slip] Extracts ordered to be referred to the Secy: f. f. Af- fairs. see Comm"" book July 15th [1788. MS. torn.] 9 Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 46. A contemporary copy is in CC Papers, no. 150, vol. m, fol. 531. 10 Kuhn, a Wyandot chief. 11 CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 555. »Ibid., fol. 559. » Ibid., fol. 535, copy. » Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 45-46. 15 Harmar Papers (1W406), Wis. Hist. Soc. Armstrong was sent on a mission to the State of Franklin. See Major Wyllys to Harmar, May 12, 1788, ibid., 1W405. "A report to Harmar on his expedition to Vincennes and return, ibid., 1W418- 423.
Page 122
122 TERRITORIAL PAPERS SUPPLEMENT TO THE LAND ORDINANCE OF 1785 [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [July 9,1788] A supplement to an ordinance entitled An Ordinance for ascertaining the mode of disposing of lands in the Western territory.17 Whereas it is found to be inconvenient to execute that part of the land ordinance passed May 20th 178518 which directs that certain pro- portions of lands be allotted to the several states to be sold by the loan officers in each state: And whereas a sufficient quantity of lands for satisfying the bounties due to the late Army was set apart by the Act of Congress passed the 22d of Oct. last,19 whereby further drafts for sat- isfying military bounties in lands from the townships lately surveyed are become unnecessary, Be it ordained by the United States in Congress assembled, That so much of the said ordinance passed May the 20th 1785, as ordains that certain parts of the townships therein directed to be surveyed shall be drawn for in the name of the Thirteen States respectively, according to the quotas in the last preceding requisitions in all the States, in order that the same be sold by the said loan officers; and also that the Secre- tary at War shall take by lot from the townships when surveyed cer- tain proportions of land for the use of the late Army, so far as the same may respect future drafts, be, and the same are hereby repealed. Be it further ordained, That the board of treasury be, and they hereby are authorised and directed to sell those parts of the seven ranges of townships surveyed in the western territory which are not already sold or drawn for the use of the late army in the same manner, on the same conditions, and under the same restrictions and limitations as were prescribed in the resolutions of Congress of April 21" 1787, 20 except as to the place of sale & the daily continuance thereof, which may be so far varied, that the said board may commence the sales at New York or Philadelphia, and adjourn the same from time to time, to any part or parts of the United States which they may judge most proper for the purpose. Be it further ordained, That the Secretary at War issue warrants for bounties of land to the several officers and soldiers of the late conti- nental Army who may be entitled to such bounties or to their respective assigns or legal representatives, certifying therein the rank or station of each officer, and the line, regiment corps and company in which the officer or soldier served. 17 For legislative history see Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 812 (first reading, Mar. 13, 1788), 813, 818, 822-823, 826, 831, 832. 11 Ante, p. 14. Ante, p. 76. soJournals Amer. Cong., iv, 739-740.
Page 123
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 123 Be it further ordained, That the Geographer by warrant under his hand and seal appoint one surveyor to each of the two tracts or districts of land set apart for satisfying the said bounties by the Act of Congress of the 22d of October last; and that the persons entitled to lands by virtue of warrants issued as aforesaid, shall be at liberty to locate them on any part of the two tracts of lands set apart as aforesaid, provided that each location and survey shall be bounded on one side by one of the external boundaries of one of the tracts aforesaid, or by some prior survey therein, and the external lines of each survey shall run east and west, north and south, such parts thereof excepted as may border upon a river bounding the district and the several surveys shall be in squares, unless where restrained by such river or by the lines of former surveys; and provided also that in every location there shall be a com- bination of as many warrants as shall make the same at least six miles square, and no interstices shall be left between surveys less than six miles wide. Be it further ordained That each surveyor upon making any survey shall protract and lay the same down in a general map to be kept and preserved & shall make a record of each survey in a book to be kept for that purpose & make out and deliver a copy of the survey certified under his hand to the proprietor or proprietors thereof; and the sur- veyor shall retain in his hands all warrants by him laid out and located until he can transmit the same to the board of treasury which he shall do within one year after laying out the land, certifying thereon under his hand that the sameis satisfied. That the surveyors to beappointed as herein before directed shall be entitled to receive for the services enjoined them by this Ordinance so much only as shall be allowed and fixed by the governor and judges of the western territory & shall be liable to be displaced by the geographer for neglect of duty or other misbehaviour in which case he shall supply any vacancy so happening by a new appointment. That each surveyor who may be appointed under this Ordinance, before he enters upon the duties of his office shall take an oath or affirmation, that he will justly and truly execute the trust reposed in him as Surveyor of a district of land in the western ter- ritory according to the best of his skill and understanding without favor or partiality which oath or affirmation shall be taken before the Governor or either of the Judges of the western territory, or one of the Justices of the Supreme Court in any of the United States, and being duly attested, shall be transmitted to the Secretary of Congress to be by him filed of record. That the maps and records before mentioned shall at all times be subject to the orders of Congress, to be removed or deposited wherever they shall direct. That if any officer or soldier, or assignee or grantee of either shall desire to have their bounty of land allotted in the townships or fractional parts thereof, lately drawn for the
Page 124
124 TERRITORIAL PAPERS army by the Secretary at War, out of the first four ranges of townships surveyed west of the Ohio, and shall cause such his desire in writing, together with his land warrant to be deposited in the office of the Secre- tary at War before the first of July 1789, the said Secretary shall cause so much of the said Townships which have been drawn for the Army, to be drawn for by lot as will satisfy the warrants so deposited, for which surveys shall be made out and delivered to the several pro- prietors, signed by the Geographer of the United States, which surveys shall be recorded in a book by the Geographer and lodged in the Treasury Office. And whereas lands are set apart for satisfying mili- tary bounties not only in the said districts and townships but also within the limits of purchases made by several companies, Be it further ordained, That the persons who have purchased tracts of the federal lands shall have credit for so much land as the warrants, issued as aforesaid and delivered by them to the board of treasury, cover, provided that in no case deductions on account of military bounties shall exceed one seventh part of the purchase. Done in Congress &c REPORT OF THE BOARD OF TREASURY:THE MEMORIAL OF JUDGES PARSONS AND VARNUM [LC: CC Papers, no. 138, vol. n, fol. 219: DS] [July 9, 1788] The Board of Treasury to whom was referred a Memorial of Samuel H. Parsons, and J. M. Varnum Judges of the Western Territory. Beg leave to Report That the object of the Memorialists is to obtain the authority of Congress, for charging their Salaries as Judges, from the time of their appointment instead of the period of taking the Oath of Office: That the reasons assigned for this application are annexed to the accounts of the Memorialists, Copies of which are herewith trans- mitted— On the above Memorial the Board beg leave to observe, That, it is the general Rule of the Treasury to compute the Salaries of Public Officers, from the time of their taking the Oaths of Office; except in cases where, the Claimants can prove, that they have been actually employed in the Public Service, previous to such period, and have been prevented by some peculiar circumstances from taking the requisite Oaths. That on the reasons offered by the Memorialists, being submitted together with their respective accounts to the examining Officers of the Treasury—they have reported; that the Governor of the said Territory, is the person best qualified for determining when the Judges began to execute the Duties of their respective Offices; at which
Page 125
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 125 period the Act for their appointment declares that their Salary should commence. In this opinion, the Board concur; as a precedent may be otherwise established, which will render it altogether Indeterminate at what period the Salaries of Persons holding Offices under Congress should commence. The Memorialists will at present be entitled to receive their Salaries as other Officers of the Civil Department, from the time of their taking the Oaths of Office; which, appears to have been on the 4th of April last; and should it hereafter appear equitable that an extra allowance should be made for the Services stated to have been per- formed by them previous to the period of taking the Oaths; the United States will without doubt make such compensation as shall appear adequate, on the proper proofs being exhibited of the propriety of such claim.— All which is humbly submitted. Samuel Osgood Walter Livingston Arthur Lee July 9th 1788.— [Endorsed] 114. Report of board of treasy on claim of S. H Parsons & J M Varnum read 9 July 1788 Referred to the board of treasy to take order — [Endorsement attached to foregoing report] Report Board of Treasury on Mem. Sam1 H. Parsons & James M. Varnum July 9th 1788 Re- ferred to the Board of treasury to take order—certified copy endorsed & transmitted 21— GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 421 :CH] Fort Harmar July 13th 1788. Sir/ In the letter I did myself the honor to write on the 5th instant23 from Fort Pitt I mentioned that the provisions intended for the Indians at the intended treaty had been sent to the place upon the Musking- ham where the meeting was appointed, and that General Harmar had furnished a small party to take care of them—This day George Wash- ington a Delaware arrived here express from the officer who commands the party with an account that the morning before he had been 21 Additional documents relating to this subject are found in CC Papers, Library of Congress. 22 Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 50-51, with a number of textual variations. There is a rough draft in the St. Clair Papers, Ohio State Library. The above text is based upon an official contemporary copy. a Smith (ed.), op. cit., pp. 48-49.
Page 126
126 TERRITORIAL PAPERS attacked by a party of Indians—that he had one man killed, two badly wounded and several missing—those missing he concluded to be either made prisoners, or attempting to make their way to this post—one of them is since come in—A negro servant of Mr Duncans was also killed and scalped. The Indians were repulsed and one of them left dead on the spot; their attack however was a very spirited one, for they rushed between the guard and some Hutts that had been thrown up to cover the Men and provisions, armed with Spears chiefly; Nine Delawares with their women and children came to the party about two hours after the attack, they expressed the greatest concern at the affair—protested their being utterly ignorant of it, and said the dead Indian was a Tawa,24 which is not improbable as it seems the party had come down the Muskingham in bark Canoes some of which were found not far above the post. It is impossible to determine whether this affair has been the mere wanton act of some predatory party uncountenanced by the Nation they belong to—whether it may have been committed by direction of the Nation to embarrass the Councils and obstruct a general peace to which it is said that Nation are much opposed—or whether it ought to be considered as an Act of general hostility—In any of these cases however I judged it improper to let the provisions remain where they were any longer—Should the Nations be resolved on War and this be the first effect of that resolution it will be soon followed by others of a more serious nature—In this uncertainty to have desired the party to be strengthned I thought would be improper and what General Harmar might well refuse—to let the provisions remain with the present guard might be throwing both into the hands of the Savages—after such an insult to meet the Indians at that place should they be inclined to come I thought inconsistent with the dignity of the United States—Taking all circumstances into view and not de- pending all together upon my own opinion, tho' alone responsible, with the advice of Judge Parsons and Judge Varnum and General Putnam I sent some boats up to bring the provisions away and re- quested General Harmar to withdraw the party—in a few days the whole will be here. In order however that I might be able in some degree to develop the intentions of the Savages, and to give them an opportunity to offer some satisfaction if they were inclined to do it I have sent a speech 25 to the Chiefs of all the Nations that are now met in Council at the Detroit or at the Tawa river (I am not certain which of the places) accompanied by one to the Wyandots at San- duskie, copies of which are enclosed. If they mean to be at Peace with the United States they will at least make an apology for what has happened—should they be hesi- "Ottawa. « Post, p. 127.
Page 127
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 127 tating or divided, then something like a threat, at the same time a desire for peace [if] is declared, may encrease the division—If War is actually determined on it can do no harm, and even in that case may do some good—the Message will probably draw forth a reply; that may produce another from me—perhaps another from them again and some time will be gained—Should they disavow the act and offer any reparation consistent with the honor of the United States, and that not strained very high, for I am well aware how embarrassing a War would be, and how ruinous to the frontier people, I shall certainly accept it, and invite them either to this place or any other of the posts they may prefer; but this affair has so much shaken my opinion of their regard to national Faith, I should not be over fond to meet them quite unprotected, which it was my intention to have done. I hope Sir Congress may not think the Ton of my Message too high—to remonstrate was become absolutely necessary, and then I thought it best to remonstrate against the whole of their improper conduct than a part only, and to do it in such terms as I thought might make some impression upon them. I have the honor to be &c. (Signed) Ar St Clair. The Honhle Gen1 Knox. Secretary at War [Endorsed] Letter from the Govr of the Western Territory to the Secty at War dated Fort Harmar 13th July 1788 Copy.2 6 [Endorsement attached] Govr St Clairs Letters of the 13th & 16th July 1788 to the Secty at War with their enclosures. (Copies) GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE INDIANS IN COUNCIL [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. Ill, fol. 437 :C] [July 13, 1788] To the Chiefs of all the Nations assembled either at the Tawa River or at the Mouth of the Detroit River. Brothers You must well remember with how much earnestness you last summer requested that Congress would listen to your requests, and send some persons to meet you in Council, in order that the causes of them might be removed. You know how readily Congress complied with your request, and that I was one of the persons appointed to meet you. You are not ignorant that the Council Fire has been long kindled at the Falls of Muskingham; which place was chosen as being the most convenient to you and to us, but principally with a view to your "Transmitted to Congress by the Secretary at War, Aug. 8, 1788 (CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 417).
Page 128
128 TERRITORIAL PAPERS convenience. The appointed time is past more than three Months, and I have been waiting with impatience to hear of your arrival, but as yet I know not whether you intend to come You have detained the Messengers sent to you, and have sent none to us in return, so that we know nothing of your minds:—Whether you are desirous of Peace as you professed yourselves to be when you applied for a Treaty, or whether you intend to go to War, as many circumstances would induce us to believe. Judge now yourselves! Would you be pleased with such conduct in any nation whatever? No you would not be pleased; neither can you expect that the United States should be pleased with it in you— But this is not all. It is not the disrespect which you have shewn that occasions this Message, but actual and unprovoked Hostility. The Citizens of the United States have been plundered and made Prisoners, and killed upon the Ohio River peaceably following in confidence of Treaties, their lawful business.—The Flag of the United States has been fired upon; and (what is perfidious beyond comparison) when a small party of Soldiers were sent to watch the Council Fire, kindled at your request;—to build a Council House for you to meet in; and to take care of the provisions sent there to feed you, you have fallen upon them, and killed them. Answer me, Should these things be? In the name of the United States I require an immediate explanation of these transactions, and demand satisfaction and the restitution of the Prisoners—Until these are made, as there can be no confidence it will be improper we should meet one another in Council. I had indeed hoped to accomplish a great and good work—to have planted the Tree of Peace—to have brought all the Nations to have watered its Roots with us and sat together under its shade—to have removed all causes of complaint on both sides, and that having sprung from the same Earth to have infused the same spirit, and have but one heart and one mind. Brothers The United States are sincerely desirous of Peace, but if you will have War, why you shall have War. I will wait some time at this place and expect soon to have an answer. (Signed) Ar Sl Clair Govr of the Territory of the U. S. N. W. of the Ohio & Commissioner for treating with the Indians. Fort Harmar July 13h 1788 A string of black & white Wampum To the Chiefs of the Wyandots. Brothers the Wyandots Harken to me A Black Cloud has arisen in the North, and darkened the prospect we had of compleating the great and
Page 129
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 129 good work. It may yet blow over, and that it may, I have sent a Speech to the Chiefs of all the Nations that are assembled at the Mouth of the Detroit or of the Tawa River; I am not sure at which place they now are, but at which ever they be, I desire that you may send it there.—It concerns both you and us to do good; and the Nations have chosen that our Messages should go through your hands—therefore be strong, and this Speech forward, and assist in removing the Cloud that at present obstructs us. REPORT OF COMMITTEE: MEMORIAL OF GEORGE MORGAN [LC:CC Papers, no. 19, vol. IV, fol. 163 :D] [July 15, 1788] The Committee consisting of [blank] to whom was referred a Memorial of Mr George Morgan 27 beg leave to report That it appears to your Committee that the Memorialist Geo: Mor- gan is duely authorised by a considerable Company viz by William Newbold, John Cox Clayton Newbold, Jos Newbold, Joseph Bloom- field, Joel Gibbs, Dan1 Vardon Jnr, Isaac Smith Sam1 W. Stockton, David Brearley, Aaron Dunham Rd Stockton, Fred: Frelinghuysen, Henry Vandike, Everit Van Wickle, William Edgar, Aaron Burr, Alex Macomb Moore Furman, Henry Vandike & 01r Pollock to contract with Congress for two million of Acres of Land on the Mississippi. That the Memorialist is willing immediately to contract for the Tract of Land described in the Act of 20th June Ult:28 at the Price and with the Exceptions and Reservations therein mentioned pro- vided Congress shall agree that the first Payment of 150,000 Dlrs be made on the first day of March next, the remainder of the Purchase Money to be paid according to the Terms of the Act. Provided also that Congress shall agree that the Company shall have the Right of Entry on the Lands thus to be purchased as soon as the first Pay- ment shall be made or after that Period as soon as the Indian claim, if any such claim exists, shall have been extinguished, the Company above named together with the Memorialist being held as security for the faithful Discharge of the Contract. On which your Commit- tee are of the Opinion that the Board of Treasury should be authorised to contract with Mr Geo Morgan in behalf of himself and Associates according to the Terms mentioned. The Committee farther observe that the memorialist is desirous to extend his Purchase as far North as the Mouth of the River au Beuf, on which they beg leave to report That in Case Mess" Flint and « June 25, 1788, Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 483. n Ante, p. 112 . 120650—34 10
Page 130
130 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Parker shall not be ready to enter into a Contract for a Tract of Land on the Mouth of the Illinois River according to the Act of 22nd Octr 1787.29 The Board of Treasury be authorised instead of the Bounds described in the Act of 20th June to Contract with Geo Morgan in behalf of himself and his Associates for the Sale of a Tract of Land within the following Boundary viz Beginning on the River au Vase in the parallel of Latitude that passes through the Mouth of the little Wabash River thence North to the parallel of the Mouth of the River au Beuf thence West to the River Mississippi opposite to the Mouth of the River au Beuf, thence down the River Mississippi to the Mouth of the River au Vase thence up the River au Vase to the Place of Beginning. [Endorsed] Report of Mr Williamson Mr Otis Mr Baldwin On col Morgan's Mem1 Entd read 1 July 1788 Recomd July 15. with Tardiveau's mem1 to Mr Williamson Mr Otis Mr Baldwin Mr Carrington Mr Seney GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 431 :CM] Fort Harmar July 16th 1788. Sir/. I had the pleasure to receive this morning your letters of the 3d 31 and 4th 32 instant together with the additional Instructions of Con- gress on the subject of the Indian Treaty.33 From mine to you of the 13th instantu (a duplicate of which, with the Messages sent to the Indians is enclosed) you will find that busi- ness has at present rather an unfavorable aspect: I am not however without hopes that it may be brought to issue in peace, being per- suaded that it is the wish of the Nations which from their situation can do us most harm, at the same time that they are most acceptable to us. I think Sir a good deal of time may elapse before the great event of peace or War is decided upon; so long at least as that I may be fully informed of the sentiments of Congress upon what has happened, and whether the steps I have taken meet their approbation.—Embarrass- ing as an Indian War would be, I would wish from that motive, if there were no others, to take every proper mean to prevent it; but it is with Nations as with Individuals, the tamely submitting to one injury usu- ally invites a greater, and where the national honor or interest is con- » Ante, p. 77. ,0 An official contemporary copy. » Ante, p. 118. ,l Not found, but a letter of July 5, ante, p. 119, may be the one referred to. » July 2, 1788, ante, p. 117. "Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, 11, 50-51.
Page 131
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 131 cerned I beleive some embarrassments ought to be overlooked so far however as I am the depository of either, I conceive I should be highly culpable not to maintain and defend them, unless I had express orders to the contrary, and that the lines of departure were pretty distinctly marked. I am very sensibly affected Sir by this fresh mark of the confidence of Congress in trusting to my disposal the further sum of twenty thou- sand dollars—I may venture to assure you that not one penny of it will be called for unless the objects in view can be attained; but it would be wrong in me, whilst the contrary is my opinion, and I believe not ill grounded, to let an expectation that they will be attained gain ground. The West line pointed out in the original instructions35 which I was at liberty to stipulate for as a boundary, would not I believe be agreed to without much difficulty, because between that line, the Ohio and Mississippi the principal hunting grounds are contained and it is the residence of some of the Nations not very well disposed towards the United States; when I say the principal hunting grounds I mean those that abound in Deer, the species of game the most essential to the Indians—To extend the boundary northward to the completion of the forty first degree would include the whole of it, as well as a great part of the Country where the Wyandots reside, and what was reserved to the Shawanese and Delawares; now Sir there is not the least proba- bility that these Countries will be given up at this time, for any consid- eration that can be offered—And I believe that if contrary to my expec- tations they should consent to make formal conveyances of that coun- try, unless they are determined to abandon it altogether which is not likely, they will never consider themselves as bound by them, so that instead of establishing a solid and permanent peace, a foundation may probably be laid for irreconcilable hatred and wasting Wars and the money be thrown away into the Bargain—These are my opinions— I offer with great defference, but I hold my duty to offer them, and notwithstanding, I will leave nothing undone within my power to accomplish the wishes of Congress. I have also enclosed Copies of letters from Wilson the Messenger38 and Khun a Wyandot Chief37 to Col° Wm Butler transmitted to me by Gen1 Butler and received since I sat down to write—Khun seems well disposed and I have reason to think that Tribe is generally so—The half King who is now dead was the greatest enemy we had amongst them. As the Post is now established to Pittsburgh the communication from this part of the Country will be easier, and I shall not fail to give » Oct. 26, 1787, ante, p. 79. "June 30, 1788, CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 445. »7 July 3, 1788, ibid., fol. 441.
Page 132
132 TERRITORIAL PAPERS you information of every thing that turns up by every opportunity from hence.38 I have the Honor to be &c (Signed) Ar Sl Clair. The Honh1 Gen1 Knox Secretary at War. INHABITANTS ON THE MUSKINGUM TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [MHS:Sargent Papers:DS] [July 16, 1788] May it please your Excellency! The condesending and affectionate manner, in which you have been pleased to make known the constitutional government of the Western Teritory, and your own appointment, as Governer and Commander therein, demands our most grateful acknowlegements. The infant state of our settlement, in this pleasent, tho ' uncultivated country, can exhibit nothing to your Excellency, worthy your attention, but the sincerest attachment, and the fair prospect of rising to happiness and greatness, under a wise administration, to be conducted by the best of men. When thus far removed from the country, that gave us birth, from our friends and from the influence of the government of any state, we esteem it one of the greatest blessings, that we can have civil govern- ment established among us, which is the only foundation for the enjoyment of life, of liberty and of property. And we also feel a particular satisfaction, in having a Gentleman of your Excellency's distinguished character, in the administration thereof, to whom we have confidence to look as to a patron, a father and a friend. As we are contious of the benifits, that must result to this Teritory, from a government thus early established, when administered by your Excellency: we shall date the Era of our civil happiness, from the joyful day on which it was established. Your Excellency may rely, that those, who are influential in pro- moting this settlement, will use every effort in establishing peace and good order in this Teritory; and are happy, that your Excellency entertains such an opinion of them. We also derive equal satisfaction with your Excellency, in having our judicial officers, Gentlemen, not only commanding respect, but also such as have attained our highest confidence and esteem. We are fully satisfied with the system of our temporary govern- ment: and while Gentlement of the abilities and rectitude of your Excellency and their honours the Judges promulgate our laws; we »8 Transmitted to Congress by the Secretary at War, Aug. 8, 1788 (CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 417).
Page 133
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 133 promise ourselves, not with a nattering hope, but with a sure expec- tation, that we shall be governed by laws, mild in their operation yet efficient to their purposes; such as are founded in wisdom and justice. The taske is truly arduous and the undertaking great, to come to so remote a country as this, to reduce forests to proper cultivation and to rear towns and cities in places explored only by natives and wild beasts: but if we persevere as we have begun, we have but little to fear; as we are favoured with every blessing that Nature can give, under the auspicies of a good government. We wish to live on the most perfect terms of friendship with all the nations of the world. We have endeavoured to sow the seeds of peace and harmony, in the breasts of the natives. We have treated them like friends, like brothers, and your Excellency's well timed advice has strengthened our resolution, to lead them, if possible, by mild and gentle means, to Civilization, Virtue and Happiness. We regret that your Excellency and also the Judges must be often absent from this settlement; as we think your presence would add both to our prosperity and happiness. But we at the same time re- joice that you will also be freequently here. May the Governer of the Universe long continue your Excellency in your present station! May your Excellency have the satisfaction of seeing the people of this Teritory, influenced by your precepts & ex- ample, become a people volentarily subjected to government and of uniforme regularity, among whom peace and justice, uninimity and friendship will ever delight to dwell! May we here find a safe, a peaceful and happy retreat; after the toils of a calamatous war! May we enjoy the richest fruits of a glori- ous revolution! And when States shall rise upon the principles of a well regulated colonial government, may your Excellency still be re- vered as the first of all the citizens! East bank of Muskingum July 16th 1788 By request and in behalf of the inhabitents of the Settlement on the Muskingum. His Excellency Auther Sl Clear Esqr [Endorsed] Reply to the Governors Speech E V Sproat 89 John May 40 Paul Fearing" "Col. Ebenezer Sproat, surveyor of the seven ranges, first sheriff in the terri- tory, and commander of militia (Cutler, ed., Journals Cutler, I, 420; indexes to the present volumes). 40 Agent of the Ohio Company and author of Journal and Letters of Col. John May, Darlington (ed.). 41 The first attorney admitted to the bar in the territory, 1787; judge of pro- bate, 1797; territorial delegate in Congress, 1801-1802(Cutler, ed., op. ext., II, 48, and indexes to the present volumes).
Page 134
134 TERRITORIAL PAPERS RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS: LAND BOUNTIES [LC:CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 147 :D] [Jtcly 17, 1788] Whereas Congress on the 13th of September 1783 fixed the terms and conditions upon which they would accept a cession of claims to Western Territory from the State of Virginia,42 and whereas the said State on the 20th of October in the same year, agreed to the same terms and conditions, and by her act Authorised her Delegates in Congress to convey, transfer, and assign to the United States, the right title and claim of the said State to the lands within her charter, and North- west of the river Ohio, on the terms and conditions proposed by Con- gress; and the said Delegates made a conveyance accordingly on the same conditions;43 among which conditions is the following, to wit. "That in Case the good lands on the South East side of the Ohio, upon the waters of Cumberland river, and between the Green river and Tenesee river, which have been reserved by law, to the Virginia Troops upon Continental establishment, should, from the North Carolina line bearing in further upon the Cumberland lands than was expected, prove insufficient for their legal bounties, the deficiency should be made up to the said troops in good lands to be laid off be- tween the rivers Scioto and Little Miami on the North West side of the river Ohio, in such proportions as have been engaged to them by the laws of Virginia" and whereas it has not, in any manner been alledged, or Stated to Congress that there is any such deficiency of lands on the South East side of the Ohio— Resolved that the executive of the State of Virginia be requested to inform Congress whether there has been any deficiency of good lands reserved by the laws of that State on the South East Side of the Ohio for the Virginia troops upon Continental establishment, and if there has been any deficiency, what is the amount at present—and also what checks have been provided by the Said State to prevent the said troops taking up more lands than are actually due to them—in order that measures may immediately be taken for laying off for the benefit of such troops a sufficient quantity of good land between the rivers Scioto and Little Miami and that Congress may be prepared to dispose of the remaining land between those rivers for the General benefit of the Union 44— Ag: a Journals Cont. Cong. (LC ed.), xxv, 559-564. « Mar. 1, 1784, ante, p. 6. « See W. Croghan to Governor Randolph, Sept. 5, 1788, and Lt. Col. R. C. Anderson to the same, Sept. 6, 1788 {Col. Va. State Papers, IV, 475-478), in re- sponse to Randolph's request for information.
Page 135
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 135 [Endorsed] No. 23 Scioto lands Motion—Mr Dane respecting lands reserved by the State of Virginia between Scioto & little Miami Passed July 17th 1788 45— REPORT OF COMMITTEE: APPOINTMENT OF SURVEYORS OF PUBLIC LANDS [LC:CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 429:D] [July 17, 1788] The Committee consisting of—[blank] to whom was referred a Motion of Mr Williamson submit the following Resolves That the Geographer be authorised to appoint such Surveyors as he shall think are best qualifyed to discharge the Duties of that Office, without any Reference to former appointments, to each of whom as also to the Chain Carriers whom they may employ shall be admin- istered the Oath prescribed by the Ordinance of May 20th 1785. Ag: That there shall be allowed to each Surveyor at the Rate of 2 Dollars per Mile for every Line he shall run on the River Ohio and 3 Dlrs pr Mile for every other Line he shall actually run in executing large Surveys, including the Wages of Chain-Carriers, Markers & every other Expence direct or indirect that may attend the same. Ag: [Endorsed] No. 4. Report of Mr Williamson Mr Dane Mr Carrington on appointmt of Surveyors passed 17 July 1788 REPORT OF COMMITTEE: LAND SURVEYS [LC:CC Papers, no. 26, fol. 681: AD] [July 18, 1788] That the Geographer be directed immediately to take Measures for having the Tract of Land surveyed that is included in the Con- tract of Mess" Cutler and Serjeant and that the Board of Treasury make the necessary advances to enable him to discharge this Duty. [Endorsed] N° 120 Motion of Mr Williamson July 18. 1788 Referred to the board of treasury & geographer to take Order— "Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 837. See also committee reports, Sept. 6, 1788, post, p. 155, and July 31, 1789, A.S.P. Pub. Lands, I, 5-6; acts of Aug. 10,1790, post, p. 296, and June 9, 1794, 1 Stat. 394.
Page 136
136 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] War Office, July 21" 1788. Sir, Your favour of the 5th instant49 has been received and sub- mitted to Congress. The dispositions of the Northern and Western Indians as stated by you, will require great address on your part to render them friendly to the United States, but it is quite problematical whether it can be effected. The acts of Congress of the 2? inst.,47 which you must have received long before the present time, as an express set out early in the morning of the 6th with the same and Captain Zeigler who marched on the 14th from Philadelphia took with him the duplicates, intending to deliver them to the care of the first safe person going directly to Fort Pitt. This additional appropriation may enable you to negotiate more ef- fectually than otherwise you could have done. Congress will be extremely anxious to hear of your success, and I am persuaded you will omit no opportunity of informing them of your prospects and proceedings. I have the honour to be, Sir, your most obedient humble servant, Knox. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. Ill, fol. 381 :C] Fort Harmar July 22d 1788 Sir/ Since mine of the 16th 48 the party which was at the Falls of Muskingham have returned to this place and brought the provisions with them. A party of Chippawas came into that Station in a day or two after the affair there—their behaviour gave the Officer reason to believe that they had ill intentions—and both him, and Mr Duncan (the person who furnished the provision and who was there for the delivery of it) were of opinion that they had been engaged in the out- rage; and were possitive as to one of them, who they actually saw kill one of the Soldiers, he therefore thought it proper to make them pris- oners; they are now here six in number, and in close confinement. Another circumstance which corroborated the opinion of their hav- ing been concerned was one of the Soldiers Cartridge Boxes having been found in their possession—whan questioned about it, they pre- « Ante, p. 119. "Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 828. See also additional instructions to St. Clair of same date, ante, p. 117. 4 8 Ante, p. 130.
Page 137
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 137 varicated—A Woman of theirs pretended to have found it in the woods and appealed to a Delaware who, she said, was with her when she found it—the Delaware Woman contradicted her—"She had indeed been with her in the woods, but not when she found the Cartridge Box." There is no further intelligence from the Indian Country—it will yet be six or eight days before my Messenger will return but I have some reason to expect the Pipe48 with a number of Delawares sooner— should they bring any thing worthy of communicating I will write you immediately. I am Sir &c (Signed) Ar Sl Clair The HoNhle Major General Knox Secretary at War [Endorsed] Letter from the Governor of the Western Territory to the Secretary at War dated Fort Harmar July 22d 1788.60 (Copy.) JUDGE PARSONS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC:N.W. Terr. Papers :ALS] Marietta 31" July 1788 Sir I was honored with your Letter, this Morning51 informing me that some People in this City, had already fallen into the practice of Selling Spirituous Liquor to Indians, as had been reported to your Excellency—early in June some people from Virginia occasioned Trouble in this Settlement by improper Conduct towards the Indians when here: sold them Spirits & otherwise misbehaved, upon which a temporary Regulation was made here, until your Excellency should arrive & give other Orders on the Subject, strictly forbiding all Traf- fic with the Indians, but under the Licence of General Harmer or of the Board of police—I know of no Instance in which that Order has been violated, and on the strictest Inquiry I have been able to make I have not the least Reason to apprehend that Spirituous Liquors have been sold to Indians by any person within this Settlement—Col. Crary and Capt Knowles are the only Persons within my Knowledge who reside here & have Liquors of any kind to sell, in Respect to Col. Crary I am very sure he never has in a single Instance sold Liquors to Indians, and Cpt Knowles so far from selling them any, I am informed he will neither sell nor give to them—I certainly would comply with your Excelleny's Desire on this Subject could I find any person to whom a Caution should be given— "A chief of the Wolf tribe of the Delaware Nation. 50 Received Aug. 21,1788, and transmitted to the President of Congress Aug. 22 (CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 385). 51 Not found.
Page 138
138 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I beleive your Excellency has been misinformed, perhaps from sinister Views; I fully agree in your Opinion of the Necessity of pre- venting such practices & am ready to concur in any proper Measures to effect it. but is not your Excellency's Authority as Superlntendant of Indian Affairs fully competent to this Business, all Commerce with Indians being forbidden but under your permission I am with great Respect & Esteem your Excellency's Obedt Servt Sam H. Parsons [Addressed] His Excellency Governor Sl Clair [Endorsed] Judge Parson July 31" 1788 About Liquor given to the Indians THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC:CC Papers, no. 18, letter book "B", p. 159 :C] Office of SECy of Congress Aug. 4th 1788 Sir, I have the honor of transmitting to you herewith enclosed an act of the United States in Congress, by which, for the reasons therein stated, the superintendant of Indian Affairs for the northern district is continued in service two months from and after the 14. of the present month.52 With great respect I have the honor to be Yr Most obedt & most h. S The honh10 A Sl Clair Govr of the Western terry MEMORIAL OF ROYAL FLINT RELATIVE TO LAND GRANT [LC:CC Papers, no. 41, vol. Ill, fol. 366:ADS] [August 8, 1788] To the Honorable the Congress of the United States. The memorial of Royal Flint for himself & associates most respect- fully sheweth, That your memorialist has been informed, that the report of your honorable committee, on the application of George Morgan, for the purchase of a tract of western territory,53 may tend to create some doubt in the construction of certain reports & resolves relative to proposals submitted to the Honorable Congress, by your memorialist & Joseph Parker, the 18th of October last.64 Your memorialist therefore humbly prays that he may be heard before the said Committee & mention his reasons for an amendment to 52 Aug. 1, 1788, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 841. 53 June 20, 1788, ante, p. 112. 54 Ante, p. 74.
Page 139
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 139 their report previous to its being passed into an act, and your memor- ialist as in duty bound shall ever pray. Royal Flint for himself & Associates. New York August, 8. 1788 [Endorsed] N. 29 Memorial of Royal Flint read 11. Aug. 1788. Referred to Mr Williamson Mr Otis Mr Baldwin REPORT OF COMMITTEE: ALTERATION IN MORGAN LAND GRANT [LC:CC Papers, no. 19, vol. IV, fol. 165:D] [August 12, 1788] The Committee consisting of [blank] To whom was referred a Memo- rial of Geo Morgan in behalf of himself and his Associates56 and sundry Papers respecting the antient French Settlers on the Mississippi report that Mr Morgan is desirous that Congress should vary in sundry par- ticulars from the Terms proposed in the Act of the 20th of June last59 both as to the mode of Payment, the circumstance of Occupancy and limits of the Tract to be sold. It is also alledged that there is not a sufficient Quantity of Timber and arable Land on the low Grounds of the Mississippi to supply the antient french Settlers with such Dona- tion Lands as Congress propose to reserve for their Benefit on which your Committee submit the following Resolves That the Board of Treasury be authorised in contracting with George Morgan and his Associates or with any other Person or Persons for the sale of a Tract of Land on the River Mississippi to vary in the following particulars from the Terms proposed in the Act of the 20th of June last viz. The first Payment of 150,000 Dlrs shall be made on closing the Contract The Remainder of the Price to be paid in seven equal Payments the first of which shall be paid whenever the Indian Title, if any such there is, shall be extinguished and the Tract surveyed by the proper Officer. The other six Payments to be made half yearly with Interest from the Time in which a Return of the Survey is made. On making the first Payment Entry shall be permitted on so much Land as that sum is equal to at the Price limited; On making the sec- ond Payment a Deed shall issue for so much Land as may then be paid for, and other Deeds if required shall issue on making the several Pay- ments; provided that it is previously stipulated on what Part the first Deed shall be laid and that all Deeds shall be for regular Tracts extending from the Mississippi to the Eastern Boundary of the general Purchase. "June 25, 1788, Alvord (ed.), Kaak. Recs. (IHC, V), 483-484. "Ante, p. 112.
Page 140
140 That in Case Mess" Flint & Parker shall not be ready to enter into a Contract for purchasing a Tract of Land on the Illinois River referred to in the Act of Octr 22nd 1787 57 as soon as the Indian Title shall have been extinguished or within four Weeks of that Time, the Board of Treasury be authorised so far to extend the Limits of the Tract described in the Act of the 20th of June last as to make the Northern Boundary in the Parrallel of the mouth of the River au Beuff. instead of Wood River. That instead of the Three Parallelograms to be reserved according to the Act of 20th June ult for Donations to the antient Settlers on the West Side of a certain Ridge of Rocks, there shall be reserved an equal Quantity of land for the same Use to be laid out in three Squares on the East Side of the said Ridge of Rocks and as near as may be to the Improvements belonging to the Villages of Kaskaskias la Prairie du Rochers and Kahokia. That in Case there are any Improvements belonging to the Antient French Settlers without the general reserved Limits the same shall also be considered as reserved in the Sale now proposed to be made. [Endorsed] Report of Mr Williamson Mr Otis Mr Baldwin on G. Morgan—Entd read 30 July 1785 Aug. 11.1788 recomd with Royal Flints memorial Entd reported ag" Aug 12.1788 read 12 Aug 15. Recomd 58 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. Ill, fol. 309 :C«] Fort Harmar, August 17'th 1788. Sir. After so long a silence as from the 22'nd 60 of last month, and when events of great moment are ripening I am sorry to have nothing of consequence to communicate—I then mentioned my expectations that the messenger I had sent with the remonstrance to the Indians would return in six days—He did return within a day or two of that time and brought from the Delawares and Wyandots the enclosed speech, N° 1," which i#nothing to the purpose, and to which I returned 57 Ante, p. 77. 58 Recommitted to Messrs. Williamson, Otis, and Baldwin. The amended re- port passed Aug. 28,1788, post, p. 144. See Morgan to Board of Treasury, Sept. 9, 1788, post, p. 156. "Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 81-83. The above text is taken from a contemporary copy made in the office of the Secretary at War for transmission to Congress. The Smith printing differs materially from the Knox copy, and the original draft, found in the St. Clair Papers (OSL), contains further variations. 60 Ante, p. 136. "1788 (no date), CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 317.
Page 141
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 141 the Answer N° 2 62 to the Pipe, thro' whom their speech came—In a few days after, the Pipe and several Wyandots amongst whom were a son of the late half-king and another young Chief came in here and delivered in Council (for every thing is done with these people seria- tim) the paper marked N° 3,M to which I returned the answer N° 4 64— Next day the Pipe addressed me on the subject of the Chippewas who are in confinement here, endeavoring to exculpate them, and throwing all the blame upon those who had escaped for what had happened at the falls; to which I returned him an answer in writing N° 5 65—In reply he acknowledged that we had reason for suspecting them, and did not, nor could not blame us for confining them—still it was the Tawas that did the mischief and they had escaped—These were Chip- pewas and had nothing to do with it, and requested they might be released—That was flatly refused him—After some time he repre- sented that the two men who had escaped would make very false rep- resentations—that they had actually done so having reported that these four who were here were put to death before they ran away, which was the reason they did it—That if one of them, if I would not release the whole could be given to him he would carry him to the meeting at the Detroit—confront him with the others, and endeavor to remove any ill impressions their reports might have made—Under the appearance of much concern for and zeal to serve the interest of the United States, which in his way he mixed with the proposition, I thought I could discover some fears he had of the resentment of the nations these people belong to against his own people,—For the Dela- wares were present when they were laid hold of, and were dismissed by Mr McDowell, the officer, in a very friendly manner—I declined giv- ing him an answer at that time but told him I would consider of it— Two days after, I sent for him, [and said] that out of consideration for him I had agreed to his proposal, and with some ceremony delivered him a Chippewa Man about fifty years of age by appearance—He engaged to take [him] to the Detroit, and to bring him back here—It appeared to me that no ill consequence could flow from gratifying him—that some good ones possibly might, and that at any rate the man was of very little consequence. I have been very anxious for an answer to the message sent to the nations at the Detroit on the 13'th ultimo,66 but as it was the 24'th before it left Sandusky, and the six nations were not arrived ten days ago (at least their arrival had not been heard of at Sandusky at that time) and the other nations will probably do nothing with it, «2 July 30, 1788, ibid., fol. 321. a No date, ibid., fol. 325. - Aug. 2, 1788, ibid., fol. 329. » Aug. 3, 1788, ibid., fol. 330. "Ante, p. 127.
Page 142
142 TERRITORIAL PAPERS without them, it may be some time yet before it will reach us, for I do not think they will decide upon their answer very hastily. There has been a great many Indians here lately, chiefly Wyandots and Shawanoese, and two or three Senecas, but except the Pipe and two Wyandots none of their principal men, most of whom they say are gone to their council at the Detroit— Yesterday a White man of the name of Zane67 who was taken pris- oner when young, and has lived with the Wyandots for many years came here with his whole family—He intends to quit, I believe the savage life and returning to his friends in Virginia who are respecta- ble—One of his brothers lives upon the Ohio at Wheeling,68 and was a member of the late Convention of that State. Whether this resolution proceeds from disgust, or from an apprehension of danger that he would rather shun I have not yet been able to learn—he appears how- ever, to be a decent sensible man, with much less of the savage man- ners than might have been expected after a residence amongst them of more than twenty years—He says [that] the reports are, for he mentions nothing as of his own knowledge, that the western nations are now all at peace, and that the Shawanoese have also laid down the Tomahawk—that very great numbers of them are expected at the Detroit, which makes the Wyandots uneasy who live there, and are comparatively a civilized people—The loss of all their horses, cattle, and dogs they look upon as the certain consequence; as upon all these they feed indiscriminately—I sounded him about the sentiments of the Indians he had fallen in with in regard to the objects of the expected treaty—He says, when sober, they generally talk of peace, but even with him they are guarded, but when intoxicated it is their general talk that they will maintain the lands on the North West side of the Ohio — that the river shall be the boundary between us—that as they were compelled to sign the treaty at the Miami, the Commissioners shall be compelled to sign what they please at this, and should they refuse they will go to war immediately, and go to the treaty prepared for the alter- native— I have letters from the messengers, Wilson and Rinkin of the 19'th, and from Rinkin of the 20'th of July, copies of which I have enclosed— Every thing is yet in a state of great uncertainty, and will not clear up until the six nations get to the Council at Detroit—Then I may have some reply from the assembled nations that will let some light in upon it—But Sir, should it take an unfavorable turn, the consequences will be fatal to the frontier countries, and even the posts that are occupied by the United States a[ll] along the Ohio would not be very safe—Not that the Indians could make any impression upon them, but the water communication would be cut off, [as] the Contractors depend so much 97 Isaac Zane. "Ebenezer Zane.
Page 143
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 143 upon it, that they never have any stock before hand, but feed them from hand to mouth—Pardon this hint it is out of my way to be sure, but it came across me, and I could not suppress it. In consequence of General Butler's letter of the 3rd of August69 I applied to General Harmar for some protection for the senecas that were expected—None could be afforded from this post, but as Captain Zeigler was every moment expected at Fort Pitt with a company the General was obliging enough to send orders for his halting there for them, and taking them under his protection until he arrived here—At the same time I sent directions to prevent their leaving Pittsburgh be- fore Captain Zeigler's arrival—I do hope the people along the river will not be mad enough to molest them on their passage, at the same time I own I fear they will if they are not restrained by seeing them under the escort of the Continental troops—General Butler's application will not have any good effect should Mr Zane communicate it, which I think he will not; I believe it would have a contrary one to what he expected and desired. I have the honor to be &c (signed) Ar Sl Clair The Honorable General Knox Secy at War [Endorsed] Letter Govr Sl Clair to The Secy at War—Augt17'th 1788.70 WILLIAM KNOX TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] War Office Aug. 18th 1788 Sir In the absence of the Secretary at War I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the 13th71 and 16th72 ult° with their enclosures,73 which were immediately submitted to Con- gress; The enclosed Resolution of the 12th instant,74 will acquaint you with the decisions of that body in consequence of your commu- nications. I also enclose you a Copy of the Secretary of War's letter of the 1st Inst with a resolve continuing the Superindt of Indian Affairs,75 North- ern district in Office for two Months from and after the 14th Inst. « Force Transcripts (St. Clair), LC. - T0 Receipt acknowledged Sept. 15, loc. tit. 7 1 Ante, p. 125. "Ante, p. 130. 73 Speech to the Indians in Council, July 13, 1788, ante, p. 127; duplicate of St. Clair to Knox, July 13, ante, p. 125. "Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 847-848. « Ibid., p. 841.
Page 144
144 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I have the Honor to be with the greatest respect Sir, Your Most Obt Servt Wm Knox The Honh1 Major Gen1 Sl Clair. Governor of the Western Territory [Endorsed] War Office Aug. 18th 1788 RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS: CONTRACT WITH GEORGE MORGAN [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [August 28, 1788] On the report of a comee consisting of Mr Williamson Mr Otis & Mr Baldwin to whom was recommitted a report on the memorial of George Morgan « and sundry other Papers. Resolved, That the board of treasury be & they hereby are author- ised in contracting with George Morgan & his Associates or with any other person or persons for the sale of a tract of land on the Missis- sippi which is described in the Act of June 20th last,77 to vary in the following particulars from the terms proposed in the said Act—viz— A payment of 200,000 dollars shall be made on closing the contract, the remainder of the price to be paid in seven equal payments, the first of which shall be paid whenever the Indian title, if any such there is, shall be extinguished, and a survey of the tract returned to the treasury Office. The other six payments to be made half yearly with Interest from the time in which the survey is returned. On making the first payment entrys shall be permitted on so much land as that sum is equal to at the limited price. On making the second payment a deed shall issue for so much land as may then be paid for, and other deeds if required shall issue on making the several pay- ments: Provided that it is previously stipulated on what part the first deed shall be laid, and that every subsequent deed shall be for a reg- ular tract as nearly as may be of an equal width extending from the Mississippi to the eastern boundary of the general purchase, and that the several deeds be for tracts in contact with one another. That in case of failure in any one of the payments stipulated for, the contract shall be considered as forfeited in all the parts thereof, which shall then remain to be carried into effect. That instead of the three parallelograms to be reserved according to the Act of 20th June last for donations to the antient settlers on the west side of a certain ridge of rocks, there shall be reserved an » May 22, 1788, ante, p. 109. 77 Ante, p. 112.
Page 145
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 145 equal quantity of land for the same use to be laid out in three squares on the east side of the said ridge of rocks, and as near as may be to the improvements belonging to the Villages of Kaskaskies, la Praire du Rochers & Kahokia78— That in case there are any improvements belonging to the antient french settlers without the general reserved limits, the same shall also be considered as reserved for them in the sale now proposed to be made79— RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS: THE INHABITANTS OF VINCENNES [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [August 29, 1788] On the report of acomee consisting of Mr Williamson Mr Dane Mr Clark Mr Tucker & Baldwin to whom was referred the report of a former comee respecting the inhabitants of post Sl Vincents80 Resolved That measures be taken for confirming in their possessions and titles the french & Canadian inhabitants and other settlers at post Sl Vincents who on or before the year 1783 had settled there and had professed themselves citizens of the United States or any of them, and for laying off for them at their own expence81 the several tracts which they rightfully claim & which may have been allotted to them according to the laws & Usages of the Governments under which they have respectively settled.82— That four hundred Acres of land be reserved and given to every head of a family of the above description settled at Post Sl Vincents— n See resolution of June 20,1788, ante, p. 114, and act of Mar. 3,1791, post, p. 339. It may be noted that power was lacking in either the President or the Governor to issue patents. See opinions of the Attorney General to the Secretary of State, Mar. 25 and Apr. 29, 1794, Hall (ed.), Opinions Atts. Gen., I, 44-45. n The report of the committee (CC Papers, no. 19, vol. iv, fol. 159) has the following endorsement: "Report of Mr Williamson Mr Otis Mr Baldwin on recommt of G. Morgan application read Aug. 28th 1788 Passed Aug. 28"> 1788". Morgan and his associates refused to enter into this contract (Morgan to Board of Treasury, post, p. 156, and Board of Treasury to Congress, Sept. 11, 1788, CC Papers, no. 140, vol. II, fol. 571). For Morgan's objections, see memorial, June 25,1788, Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 483-485. The last two para- graphs relating to donation lands were repealed by the act of Mar. 3, 1791, and the earlier resolution of June 20, 1788, was substituted. w The committee report of the same date (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 501) has the following endorsement: "N« 6. Report respecting the Settlers at Post Sl Vincent Entd read July 7.1788— Mr W»son Mr Dane Mr Clarke Mr Tucker Mr Baldwin passed Aug. 29. 1788." See also report of May 5, ante, p. 105. 81 See act of Feb. 21,1793, repealing the clause "at their own expence", 1 Stat. 318. 82 See ordinance of 1787, ante, p. 40, n. 5. 126650—34 11
Page 146
146 TERRITORIAL PAPERS That the Governor of the western territory cause to be laid out at the public expence in the form of a square adjoining to the present improvements at Post Sl Vincents and in whatever direction the settlers shall prefer, a tract of land sufficient for compleating the above donations; which tract shall afterwards be divided by lot among the settlers who are entitled to any part of the same, in such manner as they shall agree.83— INSTRUCTIONS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [August 29, 1788] On a report of the same Committee [Mr. Williamson, Mr. Dane, Mr. Clark, Mr. Tucker, and Baldwin] the following Instructions to the Governor of the western territory were agreed to84— Sir—You are to proceed without delay, except while You are necessarily detained by the treaty now on hands,8' to the french settlements on the River Mississippi, in order to give dispatch to the several measures which are to be taken according to the Acts of 20th June last86 and the 28th Instant.87 of which a copy is enclosed for Your Information. You are to enquire whether there be any Indians who claim the lands on the east side of the river Mississippi, above the mouth of the Ohio—And if there be any such Indians, You are immediately to take measures for holding a treaty with them, and extinguishing their claim at least to so much of the territory as You find described in the aforesaid Acts, and in the several Acts of Oct: 22d 1787 relative to lands on the Mississippi.88 If You find it cheapest and best to extinguish the claim of those Indians by agreeing to furnish them annually with a certain allowance in corn, or other provisions for a term not exceeding ten Years, You will contract accordingly— When You have examined the titles and possessions of the settlers on the Mississippi in which they are to be confirmed, and given direc- tions for laying out the several squares, which the settlers may divide 8» See warrants of survey and instructions to Samuel Baird, July 13, 1790, post, p. 285, and act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339. 84 The committee report of the same day (CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 157) has the following endorsement: "Western Territory Instructions &c N° 25 Mr Wil- liamson Mr Dane Mr Clarke Mr Tucker Mr Baldwin Ent Read 7 July 1788 passed 29. Aug." » At Fort Harmar. ''Ante, p. 112. 87 Ante, p. 144. 88 Ante, p. 76 et seq.
Page 147
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 147 « as they shall think best among themselves by lot, You are to report the whole of your proceedings to Congress89— After You shall have dispatched the several matters committed to your care on the Mississippi, You will take Post Sl Vincents on Your return, where You are to pursue the measures directed to be taken by the Act of this day,90 and report your proceedings accordingly.— MEMORIAL OF JOHN ETTWEIN: LANDS RESERVED FOR THE CHRISTIAN INDIANS [LC:CC Papers, no. 41, vol. Ill, fol. 143: ADS] [August 29, 1788] To His Excellency Cyrus Griffin, Esquire, President of the Con- gress of the United States in America, the Memorial and Petition of John Ettwein of Bethlehem in the County of Northampton in the State of Pennsylvania, President of the Brethrens Society for Propagating the Gospel among the Heathen, humbly sheweth That the Honorable the Congress by their Resolve and Ordinance of the twentieth of May in the Year 1785. were pleased to reserve the three forsaken Indian Towns Gnadenhiitten, Shoenbrun and Salem on the Muskingum, for the Remnant of the suffering Christian Indians and their Descendants—And that the said Honorable Body were fur- ther pleased, in the Month of August 1787. to order a Quantity of Land around and adjoyning the said Towns to the Amount of Ten thousand Acres in the Whole to be set apart and the Property thereof vested in a Society of the United Brethren for Civilizing the Indians, and Promoting Christianity,—in Trust for the Christian Indian Congregation.91 That thereupon Your Petitioner in October last, made Application to the Board of Treasury for further Instruction, how to proceed to get the said three Towns and their Improvements with Ten thousand Acres of Land adjoyning, to be surveyed—when the Honorable the Comissioners allowed Two thousand Acres as appertaining to the said three Towns, so that the whole shall not exceed Twelve thousand Acres, and promised that this Tract shall be laid off as soon as the Geographer, Mr Hutchins should be going that Way. That a Supplement to an Ordinance,92 lately published, has made 98 See report of proceedings in the Illinois country, Mar. 5-June 11, 1790, post, p. 323, under date of Feb. 10, 1791. See also Journal Exec. Procs., beginning Mar. 7,1790, post, III, 296. "See Sargent to the President, July 31, 1790, post, III, 323. "This reference is to the resolution of Congress of July 27, 1787, ante, p. 63. The writer of the memorial was in error as to the date. •» July 9, 1788, ante, p. 122.
Page 148
148 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the Directors of the Brethrens Society for Propagating the Gospel among the Heathen very desirous, that the granted Lands may be surveyed as soon as possible, being apprehensive of Difficulties, on Account of their being surrounded by the District appointed in Octo- ber last for the Officers of the late Army, and being sensible that a Survey of the Gift to the Society in Trust for the Christian Indians will greatly facilitate the Location of the Warrants granted to the Officers. That at a Consultation with the Geographer, it was found almost impracticable, on Account of the Courses of the River Muskingum, to bring the said three Towns into One regular Tract, without enlarging it to near three times the Quantity of Land granted to the Society, and that the beneficent Intention of the Honorable the Congress could not be accomplished, without the said Lands being laid out in two or three different Tracts. That the Society sensible of the Increase of the Expence in Survey- ing the said Land in different Tracts, will chearfully bear such a pro- portionable Part of the Expences as the said Increase may amount to, and willingly advance the Expences in hopes of being reimbursed at a future day. That upon Application to the Geographer, that the said Lands, if possible, may be surveyed this Fall, he answered in Writing: "I am well convinced of the Practicability of my being able to return Platts of the Survey into the Treasury Office, before the Commencement of the ensuing Year, and that without interfering with the Bussiness I am now on my Way to execute". Now Your Petitioner most humbly prays in the Name of the said Society, That Your Excellency will be pleased to order Thomas Hutch- ins, Esquire, the Geographer, to have the above mentioned reserved and granted Lands, surveyed without Loss of Time in two or three different Tracts, as the said Geographer shall find convenient for the Society. And Your Petitioner further prays that in the Sale of the interme- diate Spaces or Tracts, between the Lands so to be laid out, the Society may have the Preference, they paying for the same at the Rate at which such Lands are granted to others. And Your Petitioner as in Duty bound, shall ever pray John Ettwein Bethlehem August 29. 1788. [Endorsed] N. 22 To His Excellency Cyrus Griffin Esq. President of the Honb1e the Congress the Memorial & Petition of John Ettwein Read Sept 2d 1788 Referred to—Mr Clark—Mr Williamson Mr Madison—Acted on Sept 3d 1788
Page 149
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 149 REPORT OF COMMITTEE: MEMORIAL FROM VINCENNES AND THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [LC:CC Papers, no. 19, vol. vi, fol. 9: AD] [September 1788] The Com" consisting of Mr Clark Mr Williamson & Mr Madison to whom were referred the memorial of Mr Tardiveau94 Agent of the French and American Inhabitants of the Illinois and Post St Vincents, report, that in and by the Ordinance for the Government of the West- ern territory passed the 13th day of July 1787, it is ordained that, "There shall be neither Slavery nor involuntary Servitude in the said territory otherwise than in the punishment of Crimes whereof the party shall have been duly convicted,["] And Whereas since the passing of said Ordinance it appears there were at that time Negroes under Servitude to the inhabitants then residing at Kaskaskias Illinois Post St Vincents and other of the Antient French Settlements whose Right to the property they possessed were guaranteed by Congress in their Act Accepting the Cession of Claim to Western territory made by the State of Virginia; which Right of property it was not the inten- tion of Congress to violate by said Ordinance but merely to restrain the Settlers in future from carrying persons under Servitude into the Western territory, for remedy whereof; Resolved, That the before mentioned Ordinance for the government of the Western territory, shall not be construed to deprive the Inhabitants of Kaskaskias Illi- nois Post Sl Vincents and the other Villages formerly settled by the French & Canadians, of their Right and property in Negro or other Slaves which they were possessed of at the time of passing the said Ordinance, or in any manner to manumit or Set free any such Negroes or other persons under Servitude within any part of sd Western terri- tory; any thing in the said Ordinance to the contrary notwithstand- ing— And Whereas Congress by their Act of the 20th of June 95 and 29th of August96 last, took measures for confirming in their possessions and Titles all the French and Canadian Inhabitants and other Settlers at or near the Rivers Mississippi Illinois & Wabash, who on or before the year 1783, had professed themselves Citizens of the United States or any of them, and for laying off the several tracts which they rightfully Claim within Certain limits. And also in and by said Acts directed the laying of Certain tracts of Land of such extent as to contain four hundred acres as donations to each of the heads of families in the dis- tricts therein mentioned to be divided among them by Lot, but omit- ted making any grants of Land for Supporting Religion and for M July 8, 1788, Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 485-488. "Ante, p. 114. M Ante, p. 146.
Page 150
150 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Schools of education as had been done in the Sale of Land in the West- ern territory; for Supplying which Omission, Resolved that before any of the Tracts of Land directed by the Above mentioned Acts as donations to the heads of families, shall be laid of [f], there shall be laid out two Tracts of Land of [blank] Acres each Adjoin- ing to each Village not the property of any of the Inhabitants of such Village; one of which said tracts adjoining each Village shall be and Remain forever to the sole and only use of supporting the ministry of Religion in such Village, and the other of said tracts to remain in like manner for supporting Schools of education in the Village it Ad- joins, any thing in the Acts of Congress of the 20th of June or 29th of August last, to the Contrary notwithstanding. [Endorsed] No 4. Report Mr Clark—Mr Williamson Mr Madi- son—on Mem1 Mr Tardiveau Agent for Inhabitants of Illinois & St Vincennes—Read—Sepr 1788 See Reports on Application of Geo: Morgan for purchase of lands on Ohio & Mississippi—1788— THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] Office of Secretary of Congress, September 1" 1788. Sir, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith enclosed, an Act of the 20th of June last,97 and one of the 28th of August98 on the same subject. also an Act passed the 29th of August99 by the United States in Congress assembled, together with instructions to you for carrying into effect certain measures which Congress have in view.1 To save the time of copying the Acts of the 22d of August, 1787,2 referred to in your Instructions, and that I may avail myself of the post which sets off to-morrow from Philadelphia to Pittsburg, I send you enclosed the printed Journal of last year, and beg leave to inform you, that one of the acts of the 22d of October, 1787,3 you will find in the appendix, page 27, 28. As you will doubtless be anxious to know the proceedings of Congress, I have also enclosed a copy of the Journal of the present year as far as printed. With great respect and regard, I have the honour to be your most obedient and humble servant, Cha. Thomson Honourable Arthur St. Clair, Esquire. "Ante, p. 112. "Ante, p. 144. "Ante, p. 145. 1 Aug. 29, 1788, ante, p. 146. » This should be Oct. 22, 1787. »Ante, p. 77.
Page 151
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 151 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. III. fol. 389: ALS «] Fort Harmar County of Washington SeptT 2d 1788.— Sir I have been honored with your Letter of the 12th ult°6 together with the Act of Congress of that day,6 inclosed—In consequence of that Act I have written to the Governor of Virginia and the President of Pennsylvania 7 requesting that they would give Orders to the Lieu- tenants of the frontier Counties to have their proportions of the Militia required, in readiness; and that on my Application to the Lieutenants they should cause them to be marched to such places as the Officer commanding the federal Troops should point out.—Should the Militia be at all necessary to protect the Inhabitants, I apprehend, the Oppor- tunity of using them for that purpose would be lost by the delay that will attend an Application to be made to these Executives, at the dis- tance they are from Us, after the necessity appears; for if the Indians come to the treaty, with hostile designs, they will endeavour to amuse us for some time—get whatever they can and then make their stroke suddenly, and as they may suppose unexpectedly.—but notwithstand- ing what has happened I do not think they are hostily inclined, at least not generally, and I still hope that Matters may be settled in an amica- ble Manner—These at least were my hopes & Expectations until Mr Brown informed me of the Invasion and dispersion of the Cherokees by the People of Franklin 8—should the northern Indians get information of that Affair, and there is little Reason to suppose they will not, I do not see how they can believe Us to be in earnest when we declare the United States are disposed to be at Peace with all the Nations—they will think that either We mean to deceive them—to lull them into a State of Security that they may become the more easy Prey; or they will despise us, as having no control over own People.—Common Pru- dence, (and they are mistaken who suppose they are deficient in pru- dence, or a knowledge of their own Interests) will lead them to decline an accommodation which might be as fatal to them as an actual and avowed War; and it is the same thing to them whether their Misfor- tunes arise from the natural Weakness, or relaxation of our Govern- ments or from a want of national Faith—the Consequences are to them the same:—nor will it be possible to make them comprehend it, or be- * Printed also, with variations, in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 85-87, cap- tioned as from St. Clair to the Secretary at War. There is a copy in the Force Transcripts (St. Clair), LC. • Not found. 'Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 847-848. 7 Sept. 1, 1788, Smith (ed.), op. cit., pp. 84-85. 8 See the Secretary at War to the President, July 7, 1789, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I. 38.
Page 152
152 TERRITORIAL PAPERS lieve that we speak truth when we profess to disapprove of such Trans- actions, or that we can possibly mean Peace in the very moment we are knocking them on the Head. Congress may well be surprised that their Resolution of the 2d of July9 respecting the Treaty should have appeared in the Pittsburgh Paper of the 16th of Augt, if, as I suppose, it was put upon the secret Journal.—I have been both surprised and mortified at it—I doubt not but it will be at Detroit by the time the Indians leave it;-—but I am the more mortified at the manner in which it appears, (immediatly following an extract from a Note of mine to Majr Sargeant and with- out any reference to any other Paper—) it leads to a belief that it has been furnished by me—I hope I will not be suspected of such Folly. I have written to the Printer to know whence he had it.—get it where he would it was great imprudence to publish it. The Government has been put in motion—a County erected by the name of Washington,10 Courts instituted, and the Officers necessary for the Administration of Justice appointed, and so far every thing goes well—But the Detention I have met with has prevented any Attention being paid to the Settlements on the Wabash and Missisippi where I believe it is very much wanted: so soon as the Treaty closes I shall proceed to those Countries, but the Season is so far advanced already that it appears probable our Residence for this Winter must be taken up there. I have the honor to be with great Respect Sir Your very humble Servant Ar St Clair The honh1" Charles Thomson Esqr [Endorsed] Letter Sepr 2? 17[88] Govr St Clair—prospects respecting Indian treaty—Read—Sepr 25th 1788— GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] Fort Harmar, Sept 2,1788 Sir, Since mine to you of the 17th 11I have had the honour to receive duplicates of your Letters of July 3d 12 and 4th,13 and of August 18t," as also your favour of the 18th of that month, with their several enclo- sures.15 I am still in the same anxious state of suspense with regard to 8 Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 828. See instructions to St. Clair in pursuance thereof, of same date, ante, p. 117. 10 July 27, 1788, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 278. 11 Ante, p. 140. » Ante, p. 118. "Not found. 14 Force Transcripts (LC). 11 William Knox to St. Clair, ante, p. 143.
Page 153
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 153 the Indians as when I wrote last except that we have been visited repeatedly by considerable numbers chiefly, however, of the Dela- wares, who appear to be friendly. The only communications I have had are from the Messengers, and came to hand last night from Fort Pitt. I have enclosed the originals, not having time to take copy. It appears from them that the Six Nations, on whom the whole busi- ness seems to turn are at last arrived, so that I have reason to suspect very soon to receive information about their coming here,—that will be decisive. Which shall be immediately sent forward to you. In consequence of the Resolution of the 12th,181 have this day written to the Governour of Virginia and the President of Pennsylvania,17 requesting that they would give orders to the Lieutenants of the frontier Counties to hold their proportion of the Militia required, in readiness, and to march them in case it should be necessary to the places pointed out upon my application to them, which will save a good deal of time. Without an evident necessity no application will be made, and consequently no expense incurred, for I am most strongly impressed with the sentiments that a War with them, if it can be avoided would be very inconvenient, to say the least of it. General Butler and the Senecas are not yet arrived. He writes me that I may expect him by the middle of this week. From other infor- mation I believe he has been much mistaken about the number of those people. Instead of three hundred which he talked of, there will be far short of one; if these, however, are the proper persons, it is no disappointment. I have the honour to be, &c.18 ORDINANCE FOR SURVEY OF MORAVIAN LANDS [LC: Original Journals, Cont. Cong.] [September 3, 1788] On a report of a com" consisting of Mr Clarke Mr Williamson & Mr Madison 19 to whom was referred a memorial of John Etwein of Bethlehem, president of the brethrens society for propagating the Gospel among the Heathen.20 Whereas the United States in Congress assembled by their Ordi- nance of the 20 May 1785 21 among other things ordained that the "Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 847. 17 Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 84-85. 18 Transmitted to Congress, Sept. 19,1788, with the additional enclosures of Wilson to Butler, Aug. 14, and Wilson and Rinkin to Butler, Aug. 4, 1788 (CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fols. 293, 297, 301). "The report of the committee (CC Papere, no. 19, vol. II, fol. 229) has the fol- lowing endorsement:"N° 13—Report—Mr Clark—MrWilliamson Mr Madison on Mem1 John Ettwein of lands reserved for Moravian Indians—Entd Read Sep1 3 1788—Passed Sep' 3 1788." 20 See memorial of Ettwein, Aug. 29, 1788, ante, p. 147. !1 Ante, p. 18.
Page 154
154 TERRITORIAL PAPERS towns of Gnaden hutten, Schoenbrun and Salem with lands adjoining to the said towns be reserved for the sole use of the Christian Indians who were formerly settled there or the remains of that society; and by an Act of the 27 July 1787 22 directed the board of treasury to except & reserve out of any contract they might make pursuant to an Order of the 23 of the same month a quantity of land around and adjoining to each of the before mentioned towns amounting in the whole to 10,000 acres & ordered the property of the said towns & reserved lands to be vested in the Moravian brethren at Bethlehem in Pensylvania or the Society of the said brethren for civilizing the Indians & promot- ing christianity (or as they are called The society of the United breth- ren for propagating the Gospel among the Heathen) in trust & for the uses expressed in the said Ordinance, including others as mentioned in the said act of 27 July 1787; & whereas it has been agreed that the plot of each of the towns should be estimated at 666% acres so that each town & the reserved land adjoining shall make a tract of four thousand acres; and whereas the remnant of the said Christian Indians are desirous of returning to their towns as speedily as possible, and the United brethren to facilitate this without loss of time have offered to advance the expences of surveying the three tracts on condition they be repaid either in Money or land 23 Ordered That the geographer of the United States survey or cause to be surveyed as speedily as possible, without interfering with the business he is sent to execute, the three tracts of Gnaden hutten, Shoenbrun and Salem on the Muskingum including the reserved land adjoining each of the said towns and return plats thereof to the board of treasury, that deeds may be issued for the same as is mentioned above; and that he also survey or cause to be surveyed the intermedi- ate spaces, if any there be between the said three tracts and return plats thereof with an account of the expence to the board of treasy and that the said board, provided it can be done without infringing any contract they may have already made, convey the same to the said United brethren or the society of the said brethren for propagating the Gospel among the heathen, upon their paying for the said inter- mediate space or spaces when the said surveys shall be returned by the Geographer, at the rate at which such lands are granted to others, and also the expences attending the surveying and plotting the said spaces, deducting the sum advanced for surveying the three tracts; provided that in case any of the abovementioned lands shall fall within the supposed bounds of the million of Acres reserved for the late Army, that the said bounds shall be understood to extend so far to the West- 22 Journals Amer. Cong., IV, app., 18. » Cf. acts of June 1, 1796, 1 Stat. 490-491, and Mar. 1, 1800, 2 Stat. 14-16.
Page 155
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 155 ward as to include the million of Acres exclusive of the abovemen- tioned lands24— WILLIAM KNOX TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair 2»] War Office, September 4th, 1788. Sir, In the absence of the Secretary at War I had the honour on the 1" instant to acknowledge per post the receipt of your favor of the 22d July,28 and to inform you its contents were immediately trans- mitted to Congress. I now transmit you a Resolve of Congress of the first instant,27 accompanying a Proclamation of the same date,28 which it is intended should have an extensive circulation, I therefore take the liberty of enclosing ten copies. I have the honour to be with great respect, Sir, your most obedient servant, Wm Knox. Honourable Major Gen1 St. Clair, Governour of the Western Territory. REPORT OF COMMITTEE: LANDS RESERVED BY VIRGINIA [LC:CC Papers, no. 30, fol. 153 :D] [September 6, 1788] The Committee consisting of [blank] to whom was referred the letter of the 4th instant from his Excellency the Governor of Virginia29— report— That in their opinion it is proper the executive of the said State be informed that the act of Congress of the 17th July last30 was not meant nor is so to be interpreted as to infringe any Stipulation in the Cession made by Virginia to the United States, and that it is not the intention of Congress to take any further measures at present respecting the lands between the Scioto and Little Miami but to allow a reasonable 24 See Hutchins to Sargent, Nov. 4, 1788, post, p. 162; and Heckewelder to Sargent, June 11 and Aug. 10, 1789, Sargent Papers (MHS). 24 The original has not been found; there are two copies (not contemporary) in the Force Transcripts (St. Clair). » Ante, p. 136. "Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 859- 860. u hoc. cit. » Aug. 4, 1788, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 6. » Ante, p. 135.
Page 156
156 TERRITORIAL PAPERS time for the returns mentioned in the Act of Congress aforesaid, and for all other measures which may be requisite for ascertaining and carrying into effect on fair and liberal principles the intentions of the parties to the said act of Cession— Ag: [Endorsed] N° 25. Report of a Com"" Mr Dane Mr Williamson Mr Clark Mr Madison Mr Seney on letter Augt 4th 1788. Govr of Virginia of lands between Scioto & Miami—Entd Read Aug. 28, 1788 Passed Sepr 6th 178831— GEORGE MORGAN TO THE BOARD OF TREASURY [LC:CC Papers, no. 140, vol. II, fol. 567 :C] Prospect New Jersey, Septr 9th 1788.— Gentlemen The New-Jersey Land Society, disgusted with the Treatment of their Application to Congress, have dissolved their Asso- ciation of which I esteem it my duty to inform you.32 I have the honor to be with great respect, Gentlemen, Your most Obr servt (signed) Geo: Morgan. The Honhle Commiss" of the Treasury of the United States.— [Endorsed] Compared with the Original in the Office of the Board of Treasury. Wm Duer Secy. Letter Sepr 9th 1788—George Morgan Esqr that the land society of New-Jersey have dissolved their Asso- ciation 33—(Copy) Read Sepr 13th 1788— GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. in, fol. 253 :C «] Fort Harmar County of Washington, September 14th 1788 Sir I had the honor to address you on the second instant35 since which General Butler with fifty one (Women and Children included) of the Senecas arrived here, on the 9th—amongst these the principal »1 There is no Journal entry to this effect. See report of committee of House of Representatives, July 31, 1789, A.S.P., op. cit., pp. 5-7. a See report of committee relative to an alteration in the Morgan land grant, Aug. 12, 1788, ante, p. 139. M Transmitted to the President of Congress, Sept. 11 (CC Papers, no. 140, vol. n, fol. 572). '* From an official contemporary copy. There is a defective printing of the same letter in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 87-91. « Ante, p. 152.
Page 157
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 157 Persons are the Corn Planter, and the Half Town—thirty-six men in all. They say the six Nations are desirous to be at peace with the United States. The next day after their arrival an application was made by these Chiefs, in conjunction with Cayasutha, for the release- ment of the Chippeway Prisoners, in the name of their own Nation, the Cayugas, the Oneidas, and the Delawares; of the Cayugas however there is one only here, and two Oneidas; and these last tho' the appli- cation was made in the name of their Nation would not come into the Tent when it was delivered; it is altogether improbable that they could have had any directions on the subject. They were told that the whole affair had been represented to their general Council—that their request could not be complied with, and that we hoped to have no more solicitation on that head; many of the same kind had been made to me. Yesterday two Persons arrived from the Messengers—enclosed are Copies of their letter and of the Speeches of the Wyandots, delivered to them and by them—from these it appears that the Wyandots are well disposed themselves, and that was not with me a doubtful circum- stance; but I suspect they will not have much influence upon the western Tribes, who notwithstanding what the Kickapoes say, I have not the least expectation to see. The other Nations will be here, but it will yet be three weeks or a Month before they arrive. One of the men (Isaac Williams,) who brought these dispatches is the son of a white woman; lives at Sandusky a sensible young Man, and has re- ceived a tolerable education, and is attached to the United States— He says that Brandt did not go with the Senecas from Niagara but that he left them there, and passed up the North side of Lake Erie, and as far as the Country of the Missassagues, and returned down the Huron and St Clair to Detroit, visiting the different Nations in his way.38 From the letter of the Messengers it may be observed that a large Body of Indians may be expected here—that they are particular in mentioning their intention to be Armed—and that tho' they them- selves have been delayed so long, by the desire of the Wyandots that they might be present at their Councils, they are not to be admitted to them; but are sent to a distance and ordered to wait the result. On these I make no comment. It is also somewhat extraordinary that the British should take this opportunity again to make presents to the Indians after having so recently made them the most considerable that ever were given, at one time 87—it is also uncommon, if I am rightly »• Lt. Edward Spears to Harmar, Aug. 31, 1788, Harmar Papers (1W465), Wis. Hist. Soc. H On June 23, 1788, the sum of £25,013 was authorized for the current year (Chatham Papers, GD 8/346). I am indebted to Dr. Katharine Crane for the foregoing item.—Ed.
Page 158
158 TERRITORIAL PAPERS informed (for the six Nations at least) to take so many of their young Men with them to Council—their numbers arrived at Detroit are stated to me at two hundred, and seventy-five, and another embarka- tion from Niagara expected. From all these circumstances, which cer- tainly wear not a very favorable aspect, it may perhaps be expected by Congress that some measures should be taken by General Harmar and me, in consequence of the Resolution of Congress of the 12th of Au- gust,38 for the protection of the Inhabitants at all events:—I do not however see that we can possibly do more than merely to have the Militia in readiness to act upon an emergency, and that, if the Exec- utives of Virginia and Pennsylvania comply with my request, men- tioned in my last to have been made to them, they will be. But Sir it is very little protection they will be able to afford. Defensive meas- ures, against an enemy who allways act in small detachments, along so extended and weak a frontier, at the same time that they are as expen- sive (in the end often more so) than offensive operations, will always prove abortive, and the Militia of Pennsylvania and Virginia are too distant from each other to be joined; that part at least of the frontier of Virginia from which a thousand men could be drawn—offensive measures should then be resorted to, but these the state of public affairs forbid, if they can possibly be avoided:—and nothing in my power to obviate the necessity of them will be neglected. But a war with the Western tribes, at least, seems inevitable, both from the cir- cumstance that there is no reason to expect them at the Treaty, and from the intelligence General Harmar received two days ago which as he transmits it by this opportunity, I forbear to trouble you with— a war with them will probably involve some others; and it will soon become general. In that case permit me to give you my Ideas of the most effectual manner of bringing them to their Senses. From the Falls of the Ohio to Ouiatannon is little more than one hundred and fifty Miles—from the little Miami to the Omie or Miami Town is not more than two Hundred, if my information is right, from Beaver Creek to Cayahoga is ninety; and from Post Vincennes to the Terre Haute, where the Piankeshaws reside, and to the settle- ments of the Kickapoos is about the same distance. Could a stroke be made at all those places, nearly about the same time, and it might be so calculated as to happen at all of them on the same day, the Indians would most likely so divide themselves as to make success at each highly probable; for you may be assured, that their general con- federacy, if it exists at all, has not that efficiency which would enable the heads of it to direct its force to a point, in the security of which many of the Members would not feel themselves much interested, when each had to fear for themselves separately:—it is difficult enough among Nations who have a regular policy and strong govern- ,8 Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 847.
Page 159
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 159 ments, where the ideas of union and submission are familiar—with Savages it is impossible. Neither would these operations demand a very great number of Men or very considerable expense—between three and four thousand Militia, added to the troops in the service of the United States, might be sufficient and surely these might be fur- nished by the frontier parts of Virginia and Pennsylvania, and in such a manner as to be convenient to their respective destinations. The French settlements too could easily if I am well informed, give three or four hundred Men. The whole operation might I conceive if undertaken at a proper season be finished in thirty or forty days from the time they took up their march, tho' the calculation should be for a longer period. I am sensible Sir these observations require an apology, both be- cause I have stepped out of my line, and that they have not been so maturely considered as the importance of the object demands—they are meant only as hints of what might be done which you would not be displeased with, and as such I request you to consider them. The address of the Messengers to the Wyandots and Delawares though perhaps well enough in substance is, in my opinion highly improper in form, neither did I know they were so instructed, and General Butler assures me they were not. I should certainly have objected against an application in the name of the United States, to any Nation on Earth; much more to a few Savages, "for them to use their interest, and influence for the restoration of Prisoners," taken in Peace too and in violation of Treaties. It may have arisen from a desire to do good, with much ignorance of the proper means, and if it would rest with those nations there would be no great harm— but if it is communicated to the British Agent which it probably will be the United States may be exposed by it. There is intelligence which I believe may be depended upon, that the Indians at the mouth of the Wabash having been discovered, a party from Kentucky went to attack them—that missing them there, they crossed and marched to the Salines (or Salt River I believe of Mr Hutchins) went up that River to its head branches, and crossed from thence to the upper part of the Riviere de l'embarras, where they fell in with and had an action with Indians, some of whom were killed—They returned by Post Vincennes and Clarkes Tract to the falls, and brought in with them Six Scalps, Seven Rifles, and twenty Horses—But whether these were the Indians that made the Stroke at the mouth of the Wabash or not does not appear.39 I have the Honor to be &c (Signed) Ar Sl Clair 38 Referring to an assault on Indians of the Wabash by a party led by Patrick Brown, of Kentucky (Hamtramck to Harmar, Aug. 31, 1788, Harmar Papers, 1W445, Wis. Hist. Soc.).
Page 160
160 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Honh 1" Major General Knox Secretary at War. P. S. I suppose the following numbers might suffice for all the objects mentioned above. To March from Post Vincennes 500. "" from the Falls 1000. "" *from Limestone a little\1/(nft s 0 above the little Miami)1400- & 2 Pieces "" from Beaver Creek 1000 3900 & 2 pieces [Endorsed] Letter from the Governor of the Western Territory to the Secty. at War dated Fort Harmar Uth Septr 1788 (Copy) GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] Fort Harmar, October 7th, 1788. Sir, Since I wrote to you on the 15th ultimo401 have had no manner of intelligence from the Indian council a considerable number have still been about this place but they are not persons of any consequence have not been at their towns since the Chiefs were met, and know nothing of their designs yet even they begin to be uneasy at the delay, which has nearly exhausted my patience. The last letter from the Messengers Copies of which I had the honor to transmit, rendered it probable that the Indians would soon have been here that was the 30th of August. It is morrally impossible that a number could have subsisted about the mouth of the Miami River from that time unless provisions has been sent them from Detroit they must have despersed long ago. In the daily expectation of seeing them or hearing from Wilson and Rinkin, I wore the time away until the 20th when I sent of two white men to the towns one of whom was to have returned in 12 days, but there is no account from them now it is eighteen nine days ago two Indians were sent off who were to return immediately if they met the nations on their way but that they have not done for they are not come back in short we know nothing about them and my Conjecture is that they will not allow any communication. Two days ago Cayasutha pretended to have received private intelligence that the meeting was broken up, the Western Nations having positively refused to come near us, and the Six Nations gone home. That they had left two of their chiefs, who with the Wyandots were to be here to explain matters and to desire another meeting in the Spring. If * At the Omie Town there is a Fort constructed for the Savages by the British. [Footnote on the MS.] "See Sept. 14, 1788, ante, p. 156. The letter of Sept. 15 has not been found.
Page 161
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 161 this is so, the truth of it must very soon be known, for there can be no cause for detaining the people who have been sent amongst them, but I give very little credit to it. It is a conjecture of the old man's which he puts off as intelligence I believe. I must beg pardon for troubling you with these trifling and inconclusive accounts; and indeed, I had once thought not to write any more until I could say something to the purpose, but as there must be some anxiety about both the stage and complexion of the business here, concluded it would be improper to let this opportunity pass. I have the honour, &c. Major Gen1 Knox, Secretary at War. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO JUDGE PARSONS AND JUDGE VARNUM [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C] Oct* 21t 1788 Gent" In the marriage Act41 I have some Objections to the first Clause—If a Limitation as to Age is necessary I should think seven- teen for the Males and fourteen for the Females a period sufficiently early for tho' early marriages undoubtedly tend to the rapid encrease of the* People—premature Marriages have a contrary tendency—It very rarely happens in this Climate that Girls of Twelve Years are even as animals fit for the reception of the Male, as moral Ag a family a Boy of fourteen and Girl of twelve could not be expected to discharge their duties with much propriety.42 The Clause respect- ing Persons living out of the Territory requires alteration—perhaps in this manner "where Persons not resident within the Territory shall apply to be joined in Marriage the consent of pr" shall be ob- tained in like manner as if they were Citizens of the Territory of the U. S.43 In the next Clause I believe it would be proper to strike out the words "to be" before solemnized, and in the after part of it instead of "is" to say "has been" solemnized.44 In the Act of limitation45 the prosecution of all Crimes other than Capital should be confined to two Years—Crimes of an infamous Na- ture is too general and indefinite a description and in strict propriety of Speech would extend to Crimes of every Species—with these altera- tions I shall agree to them, but it may be that I am mistaken about 41 Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvn), 22-23. «Ibid., p. 22. 4» The suggested alteration was not made, ibid., p. 22. "These changes were made, ibid., p. 23. « Passed Dec. 28, 1788, ibid., pp. 25-26. This act was disapproved by Con- gress May 8, 1792; see post, p. 396. 126650—34 12
Page 162
162 TERRITORIAL PAPERS them and shall be glad to be set right—There was a Law agreed upon long ago for the Powers and dutys of the probate Officer,48 but it never came back to me it seems necessary that Law should be published. [Endorsed] To Judge Parsons & Varnum Octr 21l 1788 THOMAS HUTCHINS TO SECRETARY SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers: LS] Fort Harmar 4th November 1788 SiR By Virtue of the power and authority to me given by the United States in Congress Assembled I do hereby appoint you to Sur- vey, as soon as possible, the three Tracts of Ghadenhutten, Shoenburn, and Salem on the Muskingum agreeable to an Order of Congress the 3rd of September 1788,47 a Copy of which is hereunto annexed, and you will return Plats of each of the said Tracts to me, that I may be enabled to make my Report to Congress without loss of time.—And as I am desirous of giving every reasonable satisfaction to the United Breth- ren, or the Society of the said Brethren for propagating the Gospel among the Heathen, you will be pleased in the execution of this busi- ness to follow the advice of the Reverend Mr Heckenwelder,48 taking care at the same time, to run the exterior Lines of the aforesaid three Tracts of 4,000 Acres each due North and South East and West by the Compass, whether the said Tracts are surveyed into Squares or Parel- lelograms as shall be most agreeable to the said Reverend Mr Hecken- welder.—When you have made the above surveys and Noted the prin- cipal Hills Ridges and Water Courses with their bearings and direc- tions agreeable to an Ordinance of Congress of the 20th of May 1785,*9 You will on your returning two Plats thereof to me, with a description of the Country through which your surveys shall pass, and properly marking the Trees or fixing a post at every Miles distance marked with the number of Notches expressive of the distance run from the place of beginning, be entiled to receive at the rate of three Dollars for every Mile so run?— I sincerely wish you success in the execution of the above business and am Sir Your most Obedt hble Servt Tho: Hutchins Geographer of the United States To Winthrop Sargent Esquire « Passed Aug. 13, 1788, Pease (ed.), op. cit., pp. 9-10. "Ante, p. 153. ** John Heckewelder, Moravian missionary among the Indians, for an account of whom see Bliss (ed.), Zeisberger's Diary, I, xxv-xxvi. See also Heckewelder to Sargent, June 11, 1789, Sargent Papers (MHS). "Ante, p. 13.
Page 163
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 163 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. Ill, fol. 523: ALS] Fort Harmar November 6th 1788 Sir Your favor of the first of September,50 together with the Enclosures, has been in my Hands since the beginning of the last Month—that I have not acknowledged the receipt of it earlier has been owing to the expectation I was in, from day to day, that I would soon be able to mark the time when I could proceed to execute the Orders of Congress in the Country below, which were conveyed with it. from my Letters to the Secretary at War, you will have seen how those Expectations have been disapointed. The Journals you were pleased to send me arrived safe, you will please to accept my Thanks for them. By the Instructions of the 29th of August511 am directed to proceed, without delay, except while necessarily detained by the Treaty now on hand, to the french Settlements on the Mississippi. had the Treaty taken place at the time it might reasonably have been expected, I should, before now, have been in the Execution of those Instructions; but the Season is now so far advanced, and it is still so uncertain when the Indians may arrive here, that it is very doubtful whether I shall be able to go down the River before the Spring. The last Intel- ligence I have from the Indian Country is of the 22d ut°—they were said to be then on their way here, and I have looked, in vain, for the arrival of Wilson, a Messenger of ours, as their precursor, for above a Week62—their Motions must, however, necessarily be slow, as they have not a morsel of Provisions, and must consequently hunt their way—they were reduced to great Extremity before they broke up at the Miami It appears probable that the Business to be done with them here would not take up much time, as it is pretty certain there has not been much cordiality amongst them; but as the six Nations will, in all likelihood, winter in this part of the Country, they will draw the Negociation into as great a Length as possible, to have the better pretext for being supplied. In the proposed Treaty with the Indians who claim the Lands on the Mississippi, if there are any such, I observe it is expected they may be satisfied with an annual supply of Corn or other Provisions for a limited time—how such a Proposition may be relished by them I cannot say; but, if they are of similar dispositions to those we are better accquainted with it will not be relished at all. Goods, to a ■ Ante, p. 150. «1 Ante, p. 146. B Arrived Nov. 7, 1788, along with Brant and others. See Harmar's Diary, Harmar Papers (1W481),Wis. Hist. Soc.
Page 164
164 TERRITORIAL PAPERS certain value, delivered to them in that way perhaps might and if the Expence be the same I see no difference, but the Sense of Congress upon this Subject may possibly be obtained before anything can be done respecting it. I very heartily congratulate you upon the Establishment of the Government, and sincerely wish and hope to see you fill a very hon- orable and important Station in the Administration for which no Person in my knowledge is so well qualified. With very sincere regard and esteem I have the honor to be Sir Your most obedient Servant Ar Sl Clair The honh 1" Charles Thomson Esqr Secretary of Congress [Endorsed] Letter—Novr 6th 1788 Govr Sl Clair acknowled'—rect of letter & prospects of Indian Treaty &c. Recd Decr 4th 1788— GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY AT WAR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] Fort Harmar, December 3d, 1788. Sir, I had the honour to address you on the 12th ult.,M and trans- mitted the messages and information I had received to that time, with my answers to the messages, and I promise to send forward the Mes- sengers report by the next opportunity—that report I have not yet received, as I thought it best, the Indians having desired it, to send Wilson back with my answer. On the 24th Wilson returned and brought the enclosed speech No. 1. from the Six Nations.—That Speech obliged me to reply to the Six Nations particularly, of which No. 2. is a copy, and also to send a speech to the Nations, wherein I entered fully into the pretences they have made to be discharged from the obligation of former treaties—showed them the futility of them, and gave them a view of the consequences of peace and War to them- selves. But as this is a lengthy affair, and I have been very ill with the gout, and still am so, I could not get a copy ready for this convey- ance—it shall be forwarded by the next. On the first instant Wilson was again despatched with these messages, and two days after the Corn Planter sent two of his people to see what was going forward— they returned this day, and brought with them a Seneca of those who were with Brant who delivered me a message from the Wyandots and four of the Western Nations, but he could not particularise them. The purport of the Message is to let me know that they are on their u There is a badly torn draft among the St. Clair Papers (Promiscuous), OSL; the letter sent has not been discovered. The enclosures referred to in the above text are not here printed.
Page 165
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 165 way, and are got about fifteen miles on this side the Falls—that they are determined to come to the Council at this place, and desiring that we may yet have a little patience, that their hearts are good as they believe those of the Americans to be. These Indians say, that Brant, on the receipt of the Message, immediately determined to go back with his people by the way of Detroit, and had moved some miles before they set out. That from his new Encampment he had sent for the Chiefs of the Wyandots and Delawares to meet him there, but they had refused to go, telling him they were on their way to the Mus- kingham, and he might come to them there. This moment a messenger arrived from Wilson with the enclosed letter No. 3—Excuse me for troubling you with the original for I am not able to copy it. It disagrees with the Indian intelligence in the circumstance that the Chiefs were going to meet Brant. But Wilson had not seen either the Wyandots or Delawares, and it must have been Brant's conclusion that they would meet him. The Messenger says, that the Pipe the Chief of the Delawares and the Wyandot Chiefs whom he saw after parting with Brant told him they would not go, but would be here in four days. The Shawanese, Delawares, and Miamies said to be at hand, are the hostile tribes who live at the Miami village—Kekayuga is the name they give to that town. By the first opportunity that offers you will hear from me again, in the mean time, I am, with the greatest respect and esteem, Sir, yours, &c. The Honourable General Knox, Secretary at War. Wilson's letter ought to bear date of the 1" instant. THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] War Office, December 8th 1788 Sm I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the 26th and 30th of October, and also yours of the 1" of November with its enclosures by Major Doughty 54 The receipt of your several favors of the 13th, 16th and 22'nd of July. the 17'th of August. the 2'nd and 14'th of September, and the 7'th of October,55 were acknowledged from the war-Office during my ab- sence—Having but just returned from the Eastward, and the post being to depart this day, I have not time to answer your several com- munications but by the next opportunity I shall particularly reply to the several objects therein stated which may require an answer— 54 None of these letters have been discovered. "Ante, pp. 125, 130, 136, 140, 152, 156, 160.
Page 166
166 TERRITORIAL PAPERS It must be a subject of great chagrin to you to find that the indians have postponed their meeting to so late a period, and that your hopes of a general ti"eaty are so weak—Deeply impressed as you are with the evils attending an indian war at this period, you will have made use of every honorable expedient to avoid so injurious an event—and as it appears from your communications to be the wish of the officers com- manding the british posts that the indians should treat with the United States, it may be hoped that the issue will yet be favorable—If you should not be able to assemble the Northern tribes now, you may be able to make a solid arrangement for assembling them and the Western indians early the next year. At present there is no Congress, whether one will assemble until the new Constitution shall take place is uncertain. If, notwithstanding your utmost exertions, an Indian war, either partial or general, should be inevitable, the best possible arrangements should be adopted for carrying it on with such vigor as speedily to ter- minate it—For a protracted Indian war, would be destruction to the republic, under its present circumstance—In case therefore of this event becoming certain, many reasons would concur to render your presence necessary at the seat of government.— I have the honor to be, Sir, with the highest respect & esteem Your most obedient, and Very humble Servant, H Knox. The Honorable The Governor of the Western territory. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS [LC:CC Papers, no. 150, vol. m, fol. 509:ALS*l] Fort Harmar Dec* 13th 1788 Sir I have received Information, from Detroit, which I depend upon, that a certain Coll1 Conolly, who came to that place, from Quebec, last Winter has, not long ago set out for Louisville at the rapids of the Ohio—he is the Conolly that made himself pretty re- markable during the progress of the Revolution, and was appointed a Lieutt Collonel in one of the Refugee Corps—he is upon the half pay List, and has lately obtained from Lord Dorchester an addition of two hundred pounds Sterling pr Annum, and his Expences. The Reason he assigned, at Detroit for his Journey to Louisville was that he might obtain Certificates of the value of his Property in that Country which had been confiscated 67 in order to support the Claim he had made •s There is a copy in the SD Archives (Amer. Letters, vol. IV) and a printing from a different source in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 101-105. "Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), x, 293.
Page 167
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 167 upon the british Government for Compensation. My Information is, that he is sent to tamper with the People of Kentucky and induce them to throw themselves into the Arms of Great Britain, and to assure them of protection and Support in that Measure—if that can- not be brought about, to stimulate them to Hostilities against the Spaniards, and at rate to detach them from the united States.68 I have written to Major Wyllis69 who commands at the Rapids, inform- ing him of those Circumstances, and requesting him to have an Eye upon him and, if he finds him either exciting a Revolt, or tempting the People to Hostilities against Spain, to make him a Prisoner, and to send him to this Post, with a transcript of the Testimony against him, and the Names of the Persons who will support it, that they may be forwarded together to You. I know of no other Officer of the united States Sir, who could with propriety take Cognizance of it; but if in that I am mistaken, you will please to inform me to whom he should be sent in case he should be apprehended. The Offence, I have no doubt is treasonable; but whether we have any Laws to punish Treason against the united States, I doubt very much—even in that Case as the Country is within the Limits of Virginia, it must be Treason against that State, and there he might be punished for it. Since his Arrival at Louisville he gives out that he has discovered some Flaw in the Act of Assembly, and means to attempt the recovery of his Estate by a Course of Law, and, as that will detain him in the Country, he has hired a House and taken up his Residence. It is certain Sir, that, in their last Convention, a proposal was made that the District of Kentucky should set up for itself, not only as independent of Virginia but of the united States also, and was rejected by a small Majority only—it may possibly be that Overtures have made to Lord Dorches- ter; but it cannot be that my Lord would make Conolly such an Allowance, or indeed any Allowance for looking after his property and to bring on a Claim upon his Nation. Conolly has also been writing to many People about Pittsburgh and in that Country, and has intimated an intention to visit that Place this Winter; and I have heard has opened himself pretty freely to General Morgan of Winchester in Virginia— All these Circumstances put together make it more than probable that he is an agent of the British for some sinister purpose: If any other Measures than those I have directed ought to be pursued, you will oblige me by pointing them out, and they shall be executed without delay. 58 See Morgan to Gardoqui, Aug., 20, 1789, Houck (ed.), Spanish Regime in Mo., I, 286-299. « Nov. 28, 1788, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 98-99. John Plasgrave Wyllys, Major of U. S. infantry, 1785-1790, was killed in action, Oct. 22, 1790 (Heitman, Hist. Reg. Cont. Army, p. 446).
Page 168
168 TERRITORIAL PAPERS After the tedious Expectation that has attended the proposed Treaty with the Indians, there is now a prospect of its soon beginning, indeed in a few days, as they are now within two short days Journey— it will not however be a very general meeting, as Brant, who is also a british Pensioner at four hundred pounds Sterling pr Annum after coming within sixty Miles of Us, is gone back to Detroit, and has taken with him the whole of the Mohawks, and a part of some other Tribes of the five Nations, and it is to be feared will also prevail with the Shawanese and the western People, who were within two days Journey of him, on their way here, to return with him likewise. I do not however consider that as any great Misfortune, because I believe the consequence will be the Dissolution of the general Confederacy which he and the british have taken so much Pains to form, and hope to be able [to] keep the Frontiers of New York, Pennsylvania, and the upper part of Virginia in Peace this Winter— No Treaty I believe will secure the lower frontier of that State at present: If that, and the Possession and Sale of the western Territory is an Object with Con- gress they must prepare to chastise the western Nations seriously as early in the Summer as possible— The Depredations they commit upon the Inhabitants is intolerable, and it is not confined now to the Inhabitants, they have had the audacity to fall upon the Parties escorting Provisions to the Posts; and those Posts are so weak, so distant from each other, and supplied with so much difficulty that they will either fall into their Hands or be abandoned for want of Provisions, if things remain upon the Foot. It is to be feared that the Indians, at the same time, will not want for assistance from the Brit- ish—and it is pretty evident that People have no thought of surrender- ing the Posts they hold within the Territory of the united States, for Lord Dorchester, who visited them himself this last Summer, has ordered the Town at Detroit to be picketted in, which is compleated, and additional Works to be constructed there, and a Fort they call Castle St Clair, on the american side of the Strait between the Lake of that Name and the Huron, which had been begun during the War, and abandoned at the Peace, to be compleated. It was always my Fear that our western Territory, instead of proving a Fund for paying the national Debt, would be a Source of Mischief and encreasing Expence—but the Expence is not the worst part of it. It has given such a Spring to the Spirit of Emigration, too high before, that tho' it is pregnant with the most serious Consequences to the Atlantic States, it cannot now be held back and the Spaniards are also trying to turn that Spirit, with great Industry to their Advantage—so that those States not only lose their People and sink the value of their Soil for the present, but are laying the foundation of the Greatness of a rival Country. It is a considerable time that the Spaniards have been offering a thousand Acres of Land gratis, to every American who
Page 169
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 169 would remove into west Florida—to pay him ten Dollars for every hundred weight of Tobacco he could raise and deliver at New Orleans—an exemption from all Taxes and a proportionate price for Provisions and other Articles the produce of his Farm but they have lately gone a step farther—If I am well informed, Coll1 Morgan, who was lately in Treaty with the Board of Treasury for a Tract of Land on the Missisippi,80 has obtained of Mr Gardoqui a Grant of a very large Tract upon the spanish side opposite to the mouth of the Ohio,91 which he engages to settle with Americans— They are to have the same Priviledges with those who remove into Florida. He is now at Fort Pitt, and it is supposed will carry a good many People from that Country—upon Kentucky is however his chief Dependance, for in that Quarter are many Thousands of People who have been tempted by the Accounts published of its amazing fertility to quit their ancient Settlements without having secured a foot of Land there and cannot obtain Lands, but at a Price that is beyond their reach. There is no doubt many of those [who] will readily join him, for they have no Country, and indeed that Attachment to the natale Solum that has been so powerful and active a Principle in other Countries is very little felt in America. I have been casting about for some way to counteract Mr Morgan and I cannot think of any so likely to succeed, as for Congress to change the mode of disposing of the western Lands in large Tracts—at least to change it for a part of them and lay them open to be taken up by People who settle upon them— The Country upon the Missisippi and between that and the Wabash, would accom- modate the People of Kentucky who have no Land and I believe it would tempt them to remove to it, rather than the spanish side, and it might be disposed of in the manner the Proprietors of Pennsylvania sold the Lands they last purchased of the Indians—It was thus— The Lands were set at five Pounds Sterling pr hundred Acres—no more than three hundred Acres were allowed to be taken up by one Man62—he made a Description in writing, of the Peice he wanted, bounding it either upon Lands already granted, or some Creek or River, or marked Trees that rendered it sufficiently certain, and carried it to the Office of the Surveyor Gen1 where it was entered in a Book kept for the purpose—The Surveyor General issued an order for making the Survey, returnable within a certain time to his Office and the Applicant took Possession— The purchase Money run upon Interest from the date of the order of Survey—and was discharged when it was in the Persons power tho', to make them more industrious « May 22, 1788, ante, p. 109. "Documentary sources relating to the New Madrid project are found in Houck, Spanish Regime in Mo., n, 175-215. See also citations to sources in Max Savelle, "Founding of New Madrid", Miss. Valley Hist. Rev., xix, 30-56. "Thomas Penn to Physick, May 12, 1769, Penn Letter Books (HSP), vol. x.
Page 170
170 TERRITORIAL PAPERS a time was fixed within which the Patents should be taken out but no Advantage was ever taken of their overpassing that time— On the payment of principal and interest the Patent issued— I believe there is not an instance, tho' it was a very extensive Country, at least the Instances are few, where the Patents have not been taken out, and all the Land good and bad has been sold— Altho this mode would not so suddenly extinguish any part of the Debt as that now in Use, yet an Interest equal to the Interest of the Debt as far as the Lands went, would be accruing to the united States, and the principal would come in at last, and the People, who are of infinite value, that will otherwise be worse than lost will be secured— The present Inhabitants of that Country, when they see it gathering strength by the accession of new Inhabitants will be more inclined to remain in it. The Spaniards are also at work with them to induce them to abandon it, and have succeeded with many of them. Excuse me Sir for troubling you with my Ideas on the Subject—they are crude Ideas, but you will improve upon them and perfect them, if they deserve any attention—the Subject is, in my Opinion an interesting one to the united States. The Spaniard has also been making Seizures upon the east side of the Missisippi within the Territory of the united States. General Harmar, some time ago, transmitted to the War Office, this Com- plaint of a Mr M°Intosh, and I now enclose you the Deposition of a Monsieur de St Marie on a like Occasion," and extracts from a Letter of Major Hamtramack the Commandant at Post St Vincennes of the 13th of October to Gen1 Harmar." I ought Sir to beg pardon for troubling you with. so long a Letter but I cannot put an end to it without requesting you to present my best Respects to M" Jay, and to believe that I Am with the greatest Respect and Esteem Sir Your most obedient Servant Ar Sl Clair The honorable John Jay Esqr Minister of foreign Affairs for the United States 15th I have mentioned Extracts from Major Hamtramack's Letter but you will find but one—the other which respects some Depredations and the Murder of some friendly Indians, has been enclosed by Gen1 Harmar in his Despatches to the Secy at War, and I have not now time to get another made out. The Treaty with the Indians is opened, and so far as we have yet gone looks well. [Endorsed] Letter from A. St Clair Decr 13. 1788.M ■ See letter of July 22, 1790, post, p. 288. "Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, U, 105. « Answered Jan. 28, 1789, post, p. 188.
Page 171
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 171 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO JUDGE PARSONS [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C] Fort Harmar Dec114th 1788 SiR I have been looking over the Law for recording Deeds, and I observe that where the Grantor is dead or cannot appear, all the Wit- nesses or at least two must prove a Deed—This I think may be very inconvenient, for some of the Witnesses may be dead or removed out of the Territory as well as the Grantor—I believe it would be better that it should be in the power of one Witness to prove the Execution of the Deed—testifying at the same time that he saw the other Wit- nesses subscribe the Instrument. It seems to me altogether unneces- sary that the Courts should take acknowledgments of common Deeds— it must encrease the Expense and people who come to the Sessions of the Courts will have the opportunity to find the Individual Judges who will have power to take the acknowledgments. If hereafter the Sher- riff should be empowered to sell real Estates the Deeds made by him, it will be proper it should be acknowledged in open Court and become Matter of Record there. It seems also, to me to be proper that Deeds made & acknowledged out of the Territory should be confined to the same time as to the recording with Deeds made within it. As it stands Deeds made out of the Territory would be capable of being recorded at any period, and have the effect of defeating a prior bonafide purchase.68 I would also wish that Mortgages might be confined to say [blank] months67—it would not in my opinion be inconsistent with the Con- stitution, which seems to have had in View the Cases only of absolute alienation. To the Law appointing Coroners981 have no objection—but I would wish very much that all the Laws might be transcribed on separate Paper and sufficient space left at the bottom of each page for the Sub- scriptions^—There are some of them that are amongst the Records al- ready that will not impress posterity with the most favorable opinion of our Accuracy. I have Objections to the Law for vesting certain Powers in the In- habitants of towns, that I believe are insuperable. I have not time now to detail them—at any rate it is a matter that is not pressing. I am Sir [MS. illegible] The Honh1" Judge Parsons [Endorsed] Copy To Judge Parsons Decr 14th 1788 "See law establishing recorder's office, June 18, 1795, Pease (ed.), Laws North- west Terr. (IHC, xvII), 197-200. ■ See law of June 1, 1795, ibid., p. 134. "Published Dec. 21, 1788, ibid., pp. 24-25.
Page 172
172 TERRITORIAL PAPERS VIRGINIA: ALTERATION OF CESSION ACT [Files Va. House of Delegates "] An act concerning the Territory ceded by the Commonwealth to the United States Passed—December 30, 1788 Whereas the United States, in Congress assembled, did, on the seventh day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-six,70 state certain reasons, shewing that a division of the territory which hath been ceded to the said United States, by this Commonwealth, into States, in conformity to the terms of ces- sion,71 should the same be adhered to, would be attended with many inconveniences, and did recommend a revision of the act of cession, so far as to empower Congress to make such a division of the said territory into distinct and republican States, not more than five nor less than three in number, as the situation of that country and future circumstances might require. And the said United States, in Con- gress assembled, hath, in an ordinance for the government of the ter- ritory northwest of the river Ohio, passed on the thirteenth of July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven,72 declared the fol- lowing as one of the articles of compact between the original States and the people and States in the said territory, viz: "That there shall be formed in the said territory not less than three, nor more than five States; and the boundaries of the said States, as soon as Virginia shall alter her act of cession and consent to the same, shall become fixed and established as follows, to wit: The western State in the said territory shall be bounded by the Missis- sippi, the Ohio, and Wabash Rivers; a direct line drawn from the Wabash and Post Vincent's, due north to the territorial line between the United States and Canada, and by the said territorial line to the Lake of the Woods and Mississippi. The middle States shall be bounded by the said direct line, the Wabash from Post Vincent's to the Ohio; by the Ohio, by a direct line drawn due north from the mouth of the Great Miami to the said territorial line, and by the said territorial line. The eastern State shall be bounded by the last- mentioned direct line, the Ohio, Pennsylvania and the said territorial line: Provided, however, and it is further understood and declared, that the boundaries of these three States shall be subject so far to be altered, that, if Congress shall hereafter find it expedient, they shall have authority to form one or two States in that part of the said ter- ritory which lies north of an east and west line drawn through the w Printed also in Donaldson (ed.)p Pub. Domain, p. 70. 70 Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 661-662. 7 1 Mar. 1, 1784, ante, p. 6. n Ante, p. 48.
Page 173
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 173 southerly bend or extreme of Lake Michigan. And whenever any of the said States shall have sixty thousand free inhabitants therein, such State shall be admitted by its delegates into the Congress of the United States, on an equal footing with the original States, in all respects whatsoever; and shall be at liberty to form a permanent constitution and State government: Provided, the constitution and government so to be formed shall be republican, and in conformity to the principles contained in these articles; and so far as it can be consistent with the general interest of the Confederacy, such admission shall be allowed at an earlier period, and when there may be a less number of free inhabitants in the State than sixty thousand." And it is expedient that this Commonwealth do assent to the pro- posed alteration, so as to ratify and confirm the said article of com- pact between the original States and the people and States in the said territory: Be it therefore enacted by the general assembly, That the afore-recited article of compact between the original States and the people and States in the territory northwest of Ohio River be, and the same is hereby, ratified and confirmed, anything to the contrary in the deed of cession of the said territory by this Commonwealth to the United States notwithstanding. THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] War Office, 5th Jan" 1789 Sir I have the honor to enclose you a duplicate of my last to you of the 20th ultimo,73 since I have received yours of the 3d ultimo74 with its several enclosures. In the particular situation which you are placed, the capricious conduct of the Indians must give you great anxiety. I am persuaded everything will be done on your part that can be with propriety to avoid a War, and if that event should be inevitable that the evils of it may be justly charged to the Indians. We shall be impatient to learn the result of your present negotia- tions, which in any case will be highly interesting. At present there is a greater prospect of a Congress of seven States assembling by the 1" of February than existed at the time I wrote you last, but it is improbable that a Congress of nine States will be con- vened under the present confederation. I am Sir with great respect Your most Obe Hble Servant H. Knox The Honorable Gen1 Sl Clair Govr of the Western Territory » Not found. » Ante, p. 164.
Page 174
174 TERRITORIAL PAPERS TREATY OF FORT HARMAR bETWEEn THE UNITED STATES AND THE WYANDOT AND OTHER WESTERN TRIBES [SD: Original Treaties75] [January 9, 1789] Articles of a Treaty made at Fort Harmar, between Arthur S1 Clair, Gov- ernor of The Territory of the United States, North West of the River Ohio and Commissioner, Plenipotentiary of the United States of America; for removing all causes of controversy; regulating Trade, and settling boundaries, with the Indian Nations, in the Northern Depart- ment; of the One part. And the Sachems & Warriors, of the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa, Chippewa, Pattawatima and Sac Nations, on the other part. Article, 1st. Whereas, The United States in Congress assembled, did by their Commissioners, George Rogers Clark, Richard Butler, and Arthur Lee Esquires, duly appointed for that purpose; at a Treaty holden with the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa & Chippewa Nations at Fort McIntosh on the Twenty first day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and Eighty five; conclude a peace with the Wyandots, Delawares, Ottawas & Chippew[as], and take them into their friendship and protection. And whereas, at the said Treaty it was stipulated that all prisoners that had been made by those Nations, or either of them, should be delivered up to the United States. And Whereas, the said Nations have now agreed to and with the aforesaid Arthur St Clair, to renew and confirm all the engage- ments they had made with the United States of America, at the beforementioned Treaty, except so far as are altered by these presents. and there are now in the possession of some individuals of these Nations, certain prisoners; who have been taken by others, not in peace with the said United States, or in Violation of the Treaties sub- sisting between the United States and them. The said Nations agree to deliver up all the prisoners now in their hands (by what means soever they may have come into their possession) to the said Governor Sl Clair at Fort Harmar, or, in his absence to the Officer commanding there; as soon as conveniently may be. and for the true performance of this agreement they do now agree to deliver into his hands, Two persons of the Wyandot Nation to be retained in the hands of the » Printed also in A.S.P., Jnd. Affairs, I, 6-7; 7 Stat. 28-32; Kappler (ed.), Treaties, II, 13-18. The present text, derived from the original treaty sources in the Department of State, reveals a large number of variations from the versions hitherto printed. Although there are no important word differences, the number of punctuation discrepancies in the Statutes version, which is followed by Kappler, amount to over 170. In these two versions more than 60 marks of punctuation found in the original treaty are omitted, more than 60 new points are inserted, and over 40 original punctuation marks are altered, many of which changes tend to obscure the sense.
Page 175
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 175 United States, as hostages, until the said prisoners are restored; after which they shall be sent back to their Nation. Article 2nd And Whereas, at the beforementioned Treaty, it was agreed between the United States and said Natio[ns] That a bound- ary line should be fixed, between the Lands of those Nations, and the Territory of the United States, which boundary is as follows—Viz, Beginning at the mouth of Cayahoga River, and running thence up the said river to the portage between that, and the Tuscarawa Branch of Muskingum, then down the said Branch to the forks at the crossing place above Fort Lawrence; thence westerly to the portage on that Branch of the Big Miami river which Runs into the Ohio, at the mouth of which branch the Fort Stood, which was taken by the French in the year of our Lord, One thousand seven hundred and Fifty Two; then along the said portage to the Great Miami or Omie River, and down the South East side of the Same to its mouth, thence along the Southern Shore of Lake Erie, to the mouth of Caya- haga, where it began. and the said Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa & Chippewa Nations for, and in Consideration of the peace then granted to them by the said United States, and the presents, they then Received; as well, as of a quantity of goods to the Value of Six Thou- sand dollars, now delivered to them by the Said Arthur St Clair; the receipt whereof they do hereby acknowledge, do by these Presents, renew and Confirm the said boundary Line; to the end that the Same may remain as a division Line, between the Lands of the United States of America, and the Lands of Said Nations for ever. and the Undersigned Indians do hereby in their own Names, and the names of their Respective Nations and tribes, their heirs and descendants; for the consideration abovementioned, Release, Quit-Claim, Relinquish and Cede to the said United States, all the Land, East, South and West, of the Lines above described, so far as the said Indians formerly claimed the Same; for them the said United States, to have and to hold the same in True and absolute propriety for ever. Article 3rd The United States of America do by these Presents, relinquish and quit claim to the said Nations, respectively, all the Lands lying between the Limits above described for them the said Indians to live and hunt upon, and otherwise to occupy as they Shall see fit, But the said Nations or either of them Shall not be at Liberty to sell or dispose of the same, or any part thereof to any Sovereign power, except the United States nor to the Subjects or Citizens of any other Sovereign power, nor to the Subjects or Citizens of the United States. Article 4th It is agreed between the said United States and the said Nations; that the individuals of said Nations Shall be at Liberty to hunt within the Territory ceded to the United States, without
Page 176
176 TERRITORIAL PAPERS hindrance or molestation so long as they demean themselves peace- ably, and offer no Injury or annoyance to any of the Subjects or Citizens of the said United States. Article 5th It is agreed That if any Indian or Indians of the Nations beforementioned shall commit a Murder, or Robbery, on any of the Citizens of the United States: The nation or tribe to which the Offender belong[s], On complaint being made, shall deliver up the per- son or persons complained of, at the nearest post of the United States; to the end that he or they may be tried: and if found guilty punished according to the Laws established in the Territory of the United States, North west of the River Ohio, for the punishment of Such offences, if the Same Shall have been committed within the said Territory, or according to the Laws of the State where the offence may have been committed, if the Same has happened in any of the United States. In like manner if any Subject or Citizen of the United States Shall commit murder or Robbery on any Indian or Indians of the Said Nations; upon complaint being made thereof, he or they shall be arrested, tried, and punished, agreeable to the Laws of the State, or of the Territory, wherein the offence was committed That nothing may interrupt the peace & harmony, now established between the United States and said Nations. Article 6th And whereas, The practice of Stealing horses has pre- vailed very much, to the great disquiet of the Citizens of the United States, and if persisted in cannot fail to involve, both the United States of America and the Indians in endless animosity, it is agreed that it Shall be put an entire Stop to on both sides, Nevertheless should some individuals in defiance of this agreement, and of the laws provided against such offences continue to make depredations of that nature; the person convicted thereof shall be punished with the utmost severity the Laws of the Respective States, or Territory of the United States, North West of the Ohio, where the offence may have been committed, will admit of. and all horses so Stolen, either by the Indians from the Citizens or Subjects of the United States; or by the citizens or Subjects of the United States from any of the Indian Nations; may be reclaimed, into whose possession soever they may have passed and upon due proof Shall be Restored; any Sales in Market Ouvert; notwithstanding. And the Civil Magistrates in the United States Respectively, and in the Territory of the United States, Northwest of the Ohio, Shall give all necessary aid & pro- tection to Indians claiming Such Stolen horses. Article, 7th Trade, shall be opened with the Said Nations, and they do hereby Respectively engage to afford protection to the persons & property of such as may be duly licensed to Reside among them for the
Page 177
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 177 purposes of Trade, and to their Agents, Factors & Servants. But no person shall be permitted to Reside at their towns or at their hunting camps as a Trader, who is not furnished with a Licence for that pur- pose, under the hand and Seal of the Governor of the Territory of the United States Northwest of the Ohio for the time being or under the hand and Seal of one of his deputies for the management of Indian affairs, to the end that they may not be imposed upon in their traffick, and if any person or persons shall intrude themselves without such Licence they promise to apprehend him or them, and to bring them to the said Governor, or one of his deputies for the purpose before- mentioned to be dealt with according to Law, and that they may be defended against persons who might attempt to Forge such licences; they further engage to give Information to the said Governor, or one of his deputies of the Names of all Traders, residing among them from time to time; and at least once in every Year. Article, 8th Should any Nation of Indians meditate a war against the United States, or either of them and the same shall come to the Knowledge of the beforementioned Nations or either of them, they do hereby engage to give immediate notice thereof to the Governor, or in his absence to the officer commanding the Troops of the United States at the Nearest Post. And should any Nation with hostile in- tentions against the United States or either of them, attempt to pass thro' their Country, they will endeavour to prevent the same, and in like manner give information of such attempt to the said Governor, or commanding Officer as soon as possible, that all causes of mistrust and Suspicion, may be avoided between them and the United States. In like Manner the United States shall give notice to the said Indian Nations of any harm that may be meditated against them, or either of them, that shall come to their Knowledge, and do all in their power to hinder and prevent the same, that the Friendship between them may be uninterrupted. Article, 9th If any person or persons, citizens, or Subjects of the United States, or any other person not being an Indian, shall presume to settle upon the Lands confirmed to the said Nations, he and they shall be out of the protection of the United States, and the said nations may punish him or them, in such manner as they see fit. Article, 10th The United States renew the Reservations heretofore made in the beforementioned Treaty at Fort McIntosh for the estab- lishment of Trading posts in manner and form following; that is to Say, Six Miles square at the mouth of the Miami or Omie River, Six miles square at the portage upon that Branch of the Miami which runs into the Ohio. Six miles square upon the Lake Sandusky where the Fort, formerly stood and Two miles Square upon each side the 128M0-34 13
Page 178
178 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Lower Rapids or Sandusky river, which posts and the Lands annexed to them shall be for the use and under the Government of the United States. Article, 11th The post at Detroit, with a district of Land, beginning at the mouth of the River Rosine at "the West end of Lake Erie, and running up the Southern Bank of said river six miles; thence Northerly and always Six Miles West of the Strait, until it Striks the Lake St Clair, shall be reserved for the use of the United States Article, 12th In like manner, the post at Michilimackinac, with its dependecies and Twelve miles Square about the same shall be Re- served to the sole use of the United States. Article, 13th The United States of America Do hereby Renew and confirm the peace & Friendship entered into with the said Nations, at the Treaty beforementioned held at Fort McIntosh, and the said Na- tions again acknowledge themselves, and all their Tribes to be under the protection of the Said United States, and no other power whatever. Article 14th The United States of America, Do also receive into their Friendship and protection the Nations of the Pattiwatimas, and Sacs, and do hereby establish a League of Peace and Amity between them respectively and all the Articles of this treaty so far as they apply to these Nations, are to be considered as made and concluded in all, and every part expressly with them and each of them. Article, 15 th And Whereas, in describing the boundary before- mentioned, the words if strictly, constructed would carry it from the portage on that Branch of the Miami which runs into the Ohio, over to the River Au Glaize which was neither the Intention of the Indians, nor of the Commissioners. It is hereby declared, that the Line shall Run from the said Portage directly to the first fork of the Miami River which is to the Southward & Eastward of the Miami Village, Thence down the Main Branch of the Miami River to the said Village, and thence down that River to Lake Erie and along the Margin of the Lake to the place of Beginning. Done at Fort Harmar- on the Muskingum this ninth day of January in the Year of our Lord one thousand Seven hundred & Eighty nine. In witness whereof the parties have hereunto interchangeably Set their hands & Seals.76 71 Among the Pickering Papers (MHS) is a memorandum of "Remarks on the proposed Instructions to the Commissioners" by Timothy Pickering, in connec-
Page 179
5? © CO ' ' © Ar S« Clair [l. s.] In presence rf. Jos. Harmar L*Crl.Crm«l"USRegt & Brigr Gen1 by Brevet Richard Butler" Jn° Gibson 78 Will McCurdy79 Ca0 E. Denny 80 Ens 1st U S Reg' A Hartshorn Ensn Rob1 Thompson En-1" U. S. Reg* Fran9 Luse En" I. Williams Junr Wm Wilson Josep Nicholas James Rinkin a I 3 o 0) Perutewatamie KONATIKINA X [L. S.] Tepakee X [L. s.] Kesheywa X [L. s.] Mesass X [L. s.] Paushquash X [L. s.j PAWASICKO X [L. S.j Chipeways Wewiskia X [L. s.] Ottawas Neagey X [L. s.] WlNDIGO X [L. S.] Wapaskea X [L. s.] Nequea X [L. s.j Captain Pipe . [l. s.] WlNGENOND X [L. S.j PEKELAN X [L. S.] TEATAWAY X [L. s.j Delawares Nanamakeak . [l. s.] Wetenasa X [L. s.j Soskene X 0. s.j PEWANAKUM X [L. S.j Chipeways Teyandat'on'tic X [L. s. Cheyawe X [L. s. DOUEYENTEAT X [L. S. TARHE X [L. S. Terhataw X [L. s. Datasay X [L. s. MAUDORONK X [L. S. SKAHOMAT X [L. S. $ a. o [Signatures to Treaty of Fort Harmar signed January r178r between the United States and the Wyandot and other Western Tribes] ^ See footnotes on pp. 187-181.
Page 180
180 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Be it remambared, That the Wyandots have laid claim to the Lands that ware granted to the shawanese, at the treaty held at the Miami and have declared that as the Shawanese have been so Restless and caused so much trouble, both to them and to the United States, if they will not now be at peace they will dispossess them, and take the coun- try into their own hands, for that the Country is theirs of Right, and the Shawanese are only living upon it by their permission, they further lay claim to all the Country West of the Miami boundary from the Village to the Lake Erie and declare that it is now under their manage- ment and direction. SEPERATE ARTICLE. Whereas. The Wyandots have Represented that within the reserva- tion from the River Rosine, along the Strait they have two Villages from which they cannot with any convenience remove; it is agreed that they shall remain in possession of the same and shall not be in any manner disturbed therein. tion with the pending conference with the Six Nations at Canandaigua in 1792, which contains the following entry: "Admitting the Delaware, Wyandots & other western Indians to be the proper owners of the land mentioned in this article [between the Ohio and Lake Erie], & therefore having the right to sell them—A difficulty will arise from their denying that their nations were duly represented at the Treaty of Fort Harmar. M1 Heckewelder does not find among the grantors the name of even one Great Chief .... The following estimate of the nations of Indians northwest of the Ohio, has been formed by Mr Heckewelder, with such aid of information as he could obtain at Detroit. Of all the names only 4 are known to Mr Heckewelder as principal chiefs. Of the Delaware in particular but one tribe of three appears to have been represented—and that the most inconsiderable. Pipe was the only chief—the other three are but counsellors. The Delawares under Buckongahelas constitute two thirds of the nation—not one of whom was present. But One of the three principal Ottawa Chiefs was present But one of two Putiwatima princi- pal cheifs No Shawnoes But One of three principal Chippewa Chiefs." "An officer of the Pennsylvania line in the Revolution; brigadier general, 1783; major general U. S. levies, 1791; killed in action, Nov. 4, 1791 (Heitman, Reg. Cont. Army, p. 111). 79 In command of western frontier troops at the close of the Revolution. In 1800 he was appointed Secretary of the Territory of Indiana, which position he held until the admission of the Territory into the Union (Pa. Archs., 2 ser., IV, 68). "Of Pennsylvania; captain Continental Army, 1781, and of U. S. Infantry, 1784-1791 (Heitman, Reg. Cont. Army, p. 276).
Page 181
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 181 [Endorsed] Treaty with the Wyandots &c. concluded at Fort Har- mar January 9th 1789—ratified 29 Septr 1789.81 The following are the Names of the Hostages left at Fort Harmar agreeably to the first Article— 80 Ebenezer Denny, with Harmar's regiment in the West, 1784-1787; captain U. S. Infantry, 1791; author of "Military Journal of Major Ebenezer Denny", Memoirs Hist. Soc. Pa., vn, 207-409. 81 Post, p. 219. The intermediate stages are found in the report of the Secretary at War on the Fort Harmar treaties, May 23, 1789 (A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 7-8), and citations in note below. See also proclamation of St. Clair, Jan. 24, 1789, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 290. 82 Filed with the original manuscript texts of each of the treaties of Fort Harmar is a paper entitled "separate article", containing the language which is embodied in the separate article in the Six Nations treaty (post, p. 186); each is in the hand of Governor St. Clair. The printed text of the Wyandot treaty, as found in the Statutes version and in Kappler (ed.), Treaties, II, 17-18, contains this so-called separate article, which is placed at the end of the document. But it was mistakenly printed as a part of that treaty: it is not incorporated in the manuscript text of the original treaty proper; and its provisions are substantially embodied in articles 5 and 6, thus indicating the probable use of the language found on the separate sheet in the preparation of the latter. It is significant, moreover, that the earlier printings of the Wyandot treaty did not include the separate article, for which see Laws U.S. (Childs and Swaine, ed., 1791), p. 542; Laws U.S. (Folwell, ed., 1796, compiled and edited by Zephaniah Swift), II, 424, which represents the first off1cial publication of the laws and treaties of the United States; Laws U.S. (Biorne and Duane, ed., 1815), I, 398; Indian Treaties (War Dept., 1826), p. 49; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs (1832), I, 7; Treaties between U.S. and Ind. Tribes (1837), p. 29. These facts raise some doubts also concerning the authenticity of the article in question as a part of the Six Nations treaty. As in the case of its companion, the clause is not attached to the body of the original treaty. The question cannot be resolved at the present time, however, because the treaty was not ratified and there was therefore no official contemporary publication (post, p. 183, n. 84). The earliest printing of the Six Nations treaty appears to have been in the 1815 edition of the laws (Biorne and Duane, op. eit.), and the separate article is found therein. Chewaye Oatasy Wyandots Tehamendaye Tayanoquay Chipewa [Homehoneatoo Aquaywesias [SEPARATE ARTICLE 9!]
Page 182
182 TERRITORIAL PAPERS TREATY OF FORT HARMAR bETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE SIX NATIONS [SD: Original treaties B] [January 9, 1789] Articles of a Treaty made at Fort Harmar the ninth day of January in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty nine between Arthur S, Clair Esquire Governor of the Territory of the united States of America north west of the River Ohio, and Commissioner plen- ipotentiary of the said united States for removing all Causes of Contro- versy, regulating Trade and settling Boundaries between the Indian Nations in the northern Department and the said united States of the One Part, and the Sachems and Warriors of the six Nations of the other Part. viz. Article first Whereas the united States in Congress assembled did by their Commissioners Oliver Woolcot, Richard Butler and Arthur Lee Esquires duly appointed for that purpose, at a Treaty held with the said six Nations viz with the Mohawks, Oneidas, Onon- dagas Tuscororas Cayugas and Senecas, at Fort Stanwix on the twenty second day of October, one thousand seven hundred and eighty four, give Peace to the said Nations, and receive them into their Friendship and Protection. And whereas the said Nations have now agreed to and with the said Arthur Sl Clair to renew and confirm all the Engagements and Stipulations entered into at the before men- tioned Treaty at Fort Stanwix: And whereas it was then and there agreed between the united States of America and the said six Nations that a Boundary Line should be fixed between the Lands of the said six Nations and the Territory of the said United States, which Boun- dary Line is as follows viz. Beginning at the mouth of a Creek about four Miles east of Niagara called Ononwayea or Johnsons landing place upon the Lake named by the Indians Oswego, and by Us On- tario, from thence southerly in a direction always four Miles east of the carrying Place between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario to the mouth of Tehoseroton or Buff aloe Creek upon Lake Erie; thence south to the northern Boundary of the State of Pennsylvania; thence west to the end of the said north Boundary; thence south along the west Boun- dary of the said States to the River Ohio. The said Line from the Mouth of Ononwayea to the Ohio shall be the western Boundary of the Lands of the six Nations, so that the six Nations shall and do yield to the united States all Claim to the Country west of the said Bound- ary, and then they shall be secured in the possession of the Lands they inhabit east north and south of the same, reserving only six Miles square round the Fort of Oswego for the support of the same" The said six Nations except the Mohawks none of whom have attended at » Printed also in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 5-6; 7 Stat. 33-35: Kappler (ed.), Treaties, u, 18-19.
Page 183
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 183 this time for and in consideration of the Peace then granted to them, the Presents they then received, as well as in consideration of a Quan- tity of Goods to the value of three thousand Dollars now delivered to them by the said Arthur Sl Clair the receipt whereof they do hereby acknowledge, do hereby renew and confirm the said Boundary Line in the words before mentioned to the end that it may be and remain as a Division Line between the Lands of the said six Nations and the Ter- ritory of the united States forever. And the under signed Indians as well in their own Names as in the Name of their respective Tribes and Nations their Heirs and Descendants, for the Considerations before mentioned do release, quit Claim, relinquish and Cede to the united States of America all the Lands west of the said Boundary or division Line and between the said Line and the Strait from the mouth of Onona- wayea and Buffaloe Creek, for them the said united States of America to Have and to Hold the same in true and absolute Propriety for ever. Article Second The United States of America confirm to the six Nations all the Lands which they inhabit lying East and North of the before mentioned Boundary Line, and relinquish and quit Claim to the same and every part thereof excepting only six Miles square round the Fort of Oswego, which six Miles square round said Fort is again reserved to the United States by these presents. Article third The Oneida and Tuscorara Nations are also again secured and confirmed in the possession of their respective Lands. Article fourth The united States of America renew and confirm the Peace and Friendship entered into with the six Nations (except the Mohawks) at the Treaty before mentioned held at Fort Stanwix de- claring the same to be perpetual—And if the Mohawks shall within six Months declare their Assent to the same they shall be considered as included. Done at Fort Harmar on the Muskinghum the day and Year first above written In Witness whereof the Parties have hereunto inter- changeably set their Hands and Seals84 M This companion treaty is printed herewith, although it was never completed. At that time, conditions precedent to the completion of Indian treaties were the same as those for treaties with foreign nations: in order to become effective the approval of the Senate and pres1dential ratification and proclamation were usually necessary, although a formal exchange of ratifications was not viewed as expedient or desirable (Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 27-28; Miller, ed., Treaties and other Inter- national Acts, 1: 5-6). In this instance Senate approval was denied (Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 3-5, 24-25, 26-27, 28; Annate, 1 Cong., 1 sess., 39-41, 72, 77, 82, 84; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I,7-8, 56-58), and the President appears to have dropped the business at that point. See the President to St. Clair, Oct. 6, 1789, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 125-126. There is no endorsement on the original document, as in the case of other Indian treaties which became effective, and in the printed
Page 184
Ar S' Clair [l. s.] In presence rf. Jos. Harmar L' Crl0 Crm' 1st U S Reg' & Brigr General by Brevet Richard Butler Jn° Gibson Will M "Curdy Cap' Ea Denny Ens" 1" U S Reg' A Hartshorn Ensn Rob' Thompson En11 U S Reg' Fran" Luse En» Josep Nicholas Cageaga r drgs rrund the fire. Sawedowa r The Blast. Kiondushowa r Swiming Fish. Oncahye r Dancing Feather. Sohaeas r Falling Mruntain. Otachsaka X or Brrken Trmahawk Tekahias X r Lrng Tree. Onechsetee X r Lraded man [l. s.] Gyantwaia. X [l. s.] r Crnplanter. [l. s.] Gyasota X [l. s.] r Big Crrss. [l. s.] Kanassee [l. s.] r New Arrrw. [L. S.] ACHIOUT [L. S.] r Half Trwn. [L. S.] ANACHOUT X [L. s.] r The Wasp [L. s.] Chishekoa X [L. s.] r Wrrd Bug. [l. s.] Sessewa [l. s.] r Big bale rf a Kettle [l. s.] Sciahowa [l. s.] r Cruncil Keeper.
Page 185
to 00 03 o So to 0 KlAHTULAHO [L. S.] r Snake. Aqueia [l. s.] r Bandy Legs. KlANDOGEWA X [L. S.] r Big Tree OWENEWA X [L. S.] r Thrrwn in the water. Tewanias [l. s.] or Brrken Twig SONACHSHOWA [L. S.] r Full Mrrn. Cachunwasse [l. s.] r Twenty canres. HlCKONQUASH [L. S.] r Tearing asunder. [Endorsed] Treaty rf Frrt Harmar 9th Jan7 1789 with 6 natirns recd frrm War rffice 9 May 1797 [Signatures to Treaty of Fort Harmar signed January r 178r between the United States and the Six Nations]
Page 186
186 TERRITORIAL PAPERS SEPARATE ARTICLE" Should a Robbery or Murder be committed by an Indian or Indians of the six Nations upon the Citizens or Subjects of the united States or by the Citizens or Subjects of the united States or any of them upon any of the Indians of the said Nations the Parties accused of the same shall be tried, and if found Guilty be punished according to the Laws of the State, or of the Territory of the united States as the case may be, Where the same was committed: And should any Horses be stolen either by the Indians of the said Nations from the Citizens or Subjects of the united States or any of them, or by any of the said Citizens or Subjects from any of the said Indians they may be reclaimed into whose Possession soever they may have come, and upon due proof shall be restored, any Sale in open Market notwithstanding, and the Persons convicted shall be punished with the utmost Severity the Laws will admit: And the said Nations engage to deliver the Persons that may be accused, of their Nations, of either of the before mentioned Crimes at the nearest Post of the united States if the Crime was committed within the Territory of the united States, or to the civil authority of the State if it shall have happened within any of the united States. Ar Sl Clair text in the volume of Indian treaties (7 Stat. 33-35), published in 1848, there is no marginal reference to its promulgation by the President, as in the case of simi- lar treaties. The unexecuted treaty did not become a part of the archives of the Department of State until 1797, when it was transferred to that Department as a matter of routine information. This fact is attested by a memorandum of May 9 found enclosed with the treaty from John Stagg, jr., to George Taylor, chief clerk of the Department of State. Although the absence of approval by the Senate and promulgation by the Pres- ident did not prevent officials of the Government of the United States who were charged with the administration of Indian affairs from acting on the assumption of the treaty's validity (see the President to the Secretary of War, Nov. 19, 1790, post, p. 310; the Secretary of War to the President, Dec. 27, 1790, Washington Papers, LC; the President to the Chiefs of the Seneca Indians, Jan. 19, 1791, loc. eft.; U. S. Commissioners to confederated Indian nations, Aug. 1, 1793, A.S.P. Ind. Affairs, I, 353), the fact remains that there is no evidence in support of the legality of their action. Subsequent practice reveals that presidential proclamation was not universally deemed essential for the validity of an Indian treaty; in such an event congres- sional action in making appropriations to carry the same into effect was sufficient (Roy r. U. S., 45 Ct. CI. 177-184). In one instance, also, an Indian treaty (1851), neither ratified nor proclaimed, was held in 1897 to have been valid, since it was recognized as binding by the political departments of the Govern- ment and its benefits were accepted by the Indians (Moore r. U. S., 32 Ct. CI. 593-598). "This article is written on a separate page and is in St. Clair's hand. See ante, p. 181, n. 82.
Page 187
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 187 SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:ALS] Territory of the United States North West of the Ohio— Marietta the 15th of January 1789— Sir Six Months having elapsed since the Commencement of Govern- ment in this Territory it becomes incumbent upon me to make to you my Official Communications, agreeably to the Resolves of the honoura- ble Congress M—And I do myself the honour of transmitting to you by this Opportunity authentic Copies of all Laws, Acts and Public Records from the 9th of July 1788 to the 31"t of December inclusive87— I conceive it also my Duty to announce to you the Death of the honourable Judge Varnum, who departed this Life on the 10th Instant, much lamented by all his Friends On the 13th he was buried with mili- tary Honours & every Attention & Mark of Respect. Very many of the Indian Chiefs were of the Procession & conducted themselves with all the Decency of a civilized People I have the Honour to be Sir with great Respect & Esteem your most obedient Humble Servant Winthrop Sargent Charles Thompson Esqr [Addressed] Charles Thompson Esqr Secretary to the honh" Congress [Endorsed] Letter—Jany 15th 1789 Secy of territory N West of the Ohio—transmitting laws & Journal of Govr Judges &c—Recd Feby 20th 1789—Augt 25th 1789— transmitted a copy of this letter M—& the original papers enclosed to the President of the U: S—R: Alden 89 M See ordinance of 1787, ante, p. 41. n The text of the original proceedings, or Executive Journal, of the territory is printed post, in, 263 et seq. from the original. Sargent's official transcription of the laws which he forwarded first to the Secretary of Congress and subsequently to the Secretary of State, is in the Department of State, Territorial Papers, vols. I and II. The laws have been reprinted, from early printed texts, in Pease (ed.), Laws North- west Terr. (IHC, xvn). Subsequent to 1799 the territorial laws are printed in Ohio Stat., i, Chase (ed.), 287-350. 68 Post, p. 204. » Chief Clerk, Department of State.
Page 188
188 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC:N. W. Terr. Papers :ALS] New York 28 Jany 1789 Dear Sir I was a few Days ago honored with your's of the 13 of last month 90—It contains much useful Information, and there is Reason to regret that the fcederal government is so circumstanced as not to be in capacity to take the measures which their affairs require. A Sufficient number of Delegates to form a Congress not being con- vened, I thought it my Duty to consult those who are here, on the answer proper to be given to that Part of your Letter which respects Conolly. They are of opinion with me,—That a watchful Eye should be kept over him; and if found chargeable with the Practices you mention (either within your Jurisdiction, or that of one of the States) that he should be apprehended, and delivered to the State in which the offences may be committed, together with the Evidence of them— but if the offences should be committed within your Jurisdiction it will be best to detain him until Congress shall give orders on the Subject. There not being any fcederal Tribunal, nor general Laws for defining and punishing Treason against the united States—nor a congress sit- ting, nor likely soon to be convened, are Reasons for leaving such offenders to the Judicatures of the States in which their offences may be committed, until the new Governmt shall be in operation. We think it best that your Suspicions and Intentions respecting Conolly, should be kept as secret as possible—the less he is put on his Guard the better; and if he should be apprehended, it would be expedient to endeavour to take his Papers also. As his apprehension would probably occasion national Inquiries and Discussions, previous Attention should be paid to the obtaining and establishing satisfactory Proof of the facts with which he may be charged— I promised myself the Pleasure of writing to you again by the next Post, and with Sentiments of great Esteem & Regard I am Dear Sir Your most ob4 & hble Servt John Jay— His Excellency Arthur St Clair Esqr [Endorsed] The honhle John Jay Esqr Secy for foreign Affairs Jany 28th 1789 - Ante, p. 166.
Page 189
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 189 WILLIAM KNOX TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] (Duplicate.) War Office, January 31", 1789. Sir, The Secretary at War being confined to his bed with a severe rheumatick fever, and unable to write, I have the honour to acknowl- edge the receipt of your favour of the 13th ultimo 91 with its enclo- sures, and to enclose a copy of his last letter to you of the 19th instant.92 The Governour of Virginia has forwarded to this office the proceed- ings of the executive of that State in consequence of the Act of Con- gress of the 12th of August, 1788,93 of which, and of his letter accom- panying the same, copies are enclosed. I have the honour also to transmit you a copy of a letter from the President of Pennsylvania on the same subject. I have the honour to be Sir, with great respect, your most obedient humble servant, Wm Knox. P. S—February 16th, 1789—The Secretary at War has greatly recovered since my writing the foregoing, and I hope will be at this office previously to the departure of the next Pittsburg mail, W. Knox. THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS TO SECRETARY SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers :ALSM] New York March 11.1789 Sir, I have received your favour of the 15 Jany 95 together with your official communications containing copies of the laws acts & public records from the 9 July 1788 to 31 December inclusive.96 I presume you consider the transactions with the Indians as not being a part of "the public records of the district" or "of the proceedings of the Governor in his executive department" and therefore have omitted sending them. But as by the resolution of the 3 Oct 1787,97 from and after the 14 Aug8t last the powers duties and emoluments of the superintendant of Indian affairs are united with those of the governor, and by the resolution of the 5 of the same month Oct. 1787 in con- "Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 106-107. M Force Transcripts (LC). M With reference to joint efforts for the protection of the frontiers (Journals Am.tr. Cong., IV, 847). See also the Secretary at War to the Governor of Virginia, Dec. 9. 1788, Cal. Va. State Papers, IV, 538. w There is a contemporary copy in CC Papers, no. 8, fol. 177. ■ Ante, p. 187. Post, in, 263. Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 785.
Page 190
190 TERRITORIAL PAPERS sequence of his office of Governor he was directed to hold a treaty with the Indians within the limits of the United States inhabiting the country north west of the Ohio;98 and as the transactions with the Indians will be an important part of his duty, I submit it to his and your consideration whether it will not be proper for the future to make them a part of the Records of the district. I have read atten- tively his honour's letters to the judges and am much pleased with them. I have examined the original entry of the Ordinance for the government of the territory of the United States North West of the river Ohio and in the sentence "The governor and judges or a majority of them &c" there is a comma after "governor" but none after "judges" so that his honor's conjecture is well founded, & his interpretation I apprehend right.98 The new Congress is not yet formed, the badness of the roads having prevented the attendance of the Southern Members. As soon as they are in capacity to proceed to the execution of Business the laws which you have transmitted to me shall be laid before them. In the mean while accept the assurance of the esteem and regard with which I am Sr Your obedient humble servt Cha Thomson [Endorsed] From the Secretary of Congress—March the 11"1 1789 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS [LC:CC Papers, no. 78, vol. xxI, fol. 493:ALS] Marietta 10th of April 1789 Sir I was honoured with your Favour of the 11th Ult:,1 acknowl- edging the Receipt of my Official Communications, a few Days past but have not heard of my Oath of Office which has been transmitted you—If it has come to Hand I request you would be so obliging as to inform my Attorney Col Richard Platt2 of New York that he may be enabled to draw my Pay or Salary, which even in this very fertile & abundant Country is Essential tome—He has repeatedly applied to the Board of Treasury, but for the Want of this Certificate his Applications have been in vain. Was the Governour in the Territory I would obtain a Copy of my Oath, but his Absence puts it out of my Power— & should My Letter enclosing it have miscarried, unless some certif- icate of his in New York (where I suppose him by this Time to be) shall induce the Board of Treasury to make me Payment, I must be "Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 786. 99 See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 42, n. 14. 1 Ante, p. 189. » Treasurer of the Ohio Company and subsequently paymaster of the United States Army (Hulbert, ed., Rec*. Ohio Co., i, 17).
Page 191
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 191 reduced to very disagreeable Necessities—for my private Funds are inadequate to the Exigencies of Subsistence alone, & I am involved in all the Expenses of Office without the Prospect of any immediate Reimbursements. I shall Sir communicate your Sentiments upon my Duty in Indian Affairs to the Governour—From the Ordinance for the Government of the Territory, I have presumed to consider the Superintendant of In- dian Affairs, & Governour almost as distinct Characters—& imagined that although the Offices were at this Moment united in one Person,3 yet without a special Resolution of the honourable Congress the Sec- retary of Government could not be the recording Officer of Indian Treaties &c—because they did not appear to me, in the late Negotia- tions, & since my being in Office to be the "Proceedings of the Gover- nour in his Executive Department" as Governour—but of his Excel- lency Arthur St Clair in his adventitious Capacity or Character & General Richard Butler *—However Sir I shall at all Times most cheer- fully execute what ever is incumbent on me, & If I have erred I must beg to be indulged with the Consolation that my Duties do not appear to have been fully denned & that this may plead my Excuse— With Sentiments of great Respect & Esteem I have the Honour to be Sir Your most obedient Humble Ser[vant] W Sarg[ent] Charles Thompson Esqr [Addressed] Charles Thompson Esqr Secretary of Congress New York [Endorsed] Letter [April 10] 1789 Winthro [p Sar]geant—relating to his oath of office—whether filed in the Sec1" Office Recd May 25th 1789 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SF:1 Cong., 1 sess.:ALS5] New York May 2" 1788 [9] Sir I have the honor to lay before you the Treaties concluded, in pursuance of the Instructions received from Congress on the twenty sixth of October 1787 6 and second of July 1788,7 with several of the Indian Nations in January last.8—That they were not prescribed at an » The ordinance contains no provision touching the management of Indian af- fairs; but see resolution of Congress, Oct. 3, 1787, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 785. 4 Former superintendent of Indian affairs for the northern department. • Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 111-113, with textual changes, and in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 10, under date of 1788. «Ante, p. 78. 7 Ante, p. 117. • Jan. 9, 1789, ante, p. 174.
Page 192
192 TERRITORIAL PAPERS earlier period was owing, in part, to my own Indisposition—to the se- verity of the Winter which rendered the Communication by the Ohio, for a long time impracticable—and to the Circumstance that the last Congress did not assemble after it was in my power to have sent them forward. With the Treaties I beg leave to submit the Minutes of the proceed- ings at the different Meetings after the Nations were assembled, and I have added to them, by way of appendix, all the Letters and Messages that passed between them and me prior to their assembling.—These were communicated to the Secretary at War from time to time, and tho' they will, not doubt, be submitted by him to your Consideration, I thought it best, as they form a considerable part of the transactions, to connect them in that way, that the whole might be seen together. By the Instruction of July the second, I was directed to endeavour at extending the northern Boundary, as far north as the Completion of the forty first Degree of North Lattitude.—Besides that it would have been extremely difficult to have made the Indians comprehend how that was to be asscertained, I found that any Attempt to extend the limits at that time would be very ill received, if not defeat entirely the settling a Peace with them; it was therefore not proposed, and the Boundaries remain as settled at the former Treaties except the recti- fying an Error about the Portage at the Miami Village.9 The Negociation was both tedious and troublesome, and for a long time had an unpromising Aspect, but it came at last to as favorable an Issue as could have been expected—and I trust will be attended with Consequences freindly to the frontier parts of the united States.— There are however several Nations on the Wabash, and the Rivers which empty themselves into it, that are ill disposed; and from whom there is reason to expect that a part of the Frontier of Virginia and the Settlement forming on the Miami, will meet annoyance.10—indeed that they have not been disturbed during the Winter was not ex- pected, either by me or the Chiefs of the Nations who met me at Fort Harmar. The Wyandots did appoint Persons to go to them and in- form them of the Result of the Treaty, and insist upon their desisting from farther Hostilities, which may have had some Effect in producing the late Tranquillity. The claim of the Wyandot Nation to the Lands reserved to the Shawanese was strongly insisted upon by them, and to be made an Article of the Treaty:—to that I could not consent: but to satisfy them, and that it might be kept in Remembrance, it is inserted at the Bottom of it, by way of Memorandum. It seems this is a Claim that has always been held up, and the Reason it was so much insisted on • Art. 15 of the treaty with the Wyandot and other tribes, ante, p. 178. •° See the Secretary at War to Harmar, May 23,1789, Harmar Papers (2W43) Wis. Hist. Soc.
Page 193
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 193 at this time, they said was, that they were sure that the Shawanese, and Cherokees incorporated with them would continue to give us trouble:—that it could not be expected to be borne with, much longer:—that they would be driven out of the Country, and then it would be claimed and held by the united States by right of Conquest— they farther added that, if the Shawanese continued their deprada- tions, they would, themselves, drive them off.—They also proposed that a Post should be taken, by the united States, at the Miami Village as the surest Means to overaw the Nations on the Wabash.—. It is certainly well situated for that purpose, and would command the greatest part of the Indian Trade.—As it was very uncertain whether Congress might approve of such a Measure; as a Post so far in Land would with difficulty be supported, and were in no readiness to carry it into Execution if it should be approved, I desired them to consider well whether it could be done without a Contest with the Indians who live there—and whether, in that Case, there was not Danger of they themselves being involved thro' the ungovernableness of their Young Men.—They acknowledged they thought there was danger of both, but promised to send some of their principal Men to the Miamies and prepare them for receiving a Garrison peaceably, and are to give me Notice in the Spring. The Reason why the Treaties were made separately with the six Nations and the Wyandots & more westerly Tribes was a Jealousy that subsisted between them, which I was not willing to lessen by appearing to consider them as one People—they do not so consider themselves; and I am persuaded their general Confederacy is.entirely broken: indeed it would not be very difficult, if Circumstances required it to set them at deadly variance.11 The great length of time that elapsed between the appointed period for the Meeting, and that at which the Indians assembled, during which, Numbers of them were constantly going and coming, has encreased the Expence in the Article of Provisions considerably; the utmost possible (Economy however was used thro the whole of the Business, and in transacting it, I flatter myself with meeting the Approbation of Congress With the utmost Respect I have the honor to be Sir Your most obedient and most humble Servant Ar Sl Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] Entd Book of Reports & Communications Fol: 1. Page 85. 1" Sess. Ex. 1" Con: From the Governor of the Western Territory to the President of the United States May 2d1789. 11 See Harmar to the Secretary at War, Jan, 13, 1789, Harmar Papers (2W2), Wis. Hist. Soc.; Harmar to Hamtramck, Feb. 15, 1789, ibid. (2W9). 126600—34 14
Page 194
194 TERRITORIAL PAPERS GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO CONGRESS [LC: Force Tr., St. Clair] New York, May 16th, 1789. Gentlemen, In estimating the sums of money that will be wanted this present year on the Northern Indian Department, it will be necessary to take into view the services that were ordered to be per- formed in the last year, and the appropriations for these services, as well as the ordinary expenses. One service ordered was a Treaty with the Six Nations and the Western Indians for the purposes of establishing a boundary with them and removing every cause of complaint for which there was appro- priated the sum of fourteen thousand dollars.12 By a subsequent Resolution of Congress,13 the farther sum of twenty thousand dollars was appropriated—the whole of which, and six thousand out of the first fourteen thousand was to be applied solely and exclusively to the expenses of the Treaty, and the consider- ation to be paid for obtaining conveyances of the lands that had been ceded, making dollars $26, 000 The consideration paid to, and the expenses of the treaty held with these Indians amounted to (say) 18, 000 There remains, $ 8, 000 But the provisions issued to the Indians and others from the time the Negociation began until the Treaty was signed, amounted to some- thing more than that ballance, so that there will remain of the whole appropriated sum, if the provisions be set against it, something less than eight thousand dollars. Another service ordered the last year was the extinguishing the Indian Titles to the lands on the Mississippi,14 for which there was no appropriation. Probably Congress expected that the thirty-four thousand dollars would be sufficient for both, and it would have been nearly so, exclusive of the provisions. But the provisions may be paid for either out of that money, or settled in the general account of the contractor who supplied them. In either way it makes not any differ- ence to the United States. But if the value of them is deducted from the money appropriated, it will be necessary to bring into the estimate a farther sum for completing the above service. The whole expense of that business, provisions included, (for there will be a longer transportation, and the provisions are dearer at the Mississippi than where the other Treaty was held) can fall very little short of twenty thousand dollars, 20, 000 » Oct. 22, 1787, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 801. 15 July 2, 1788, ante, p. 117. » Aug. 29, 1788 (instructions to St. Clair), ante, p. 146.
Page 195
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 195 Measures are yet to be taken with the Shawanese, the Miam- ies, and other Nations on the Wabash, which may prob- ably cost 10,000 The ordinary expenses of the department amount to about. . 4, 700 34, 700 Deduct the balance of the money appropriated, (say) ... 8, 000 26, 000 Something more then than twenty-six thousand seven hundred dollars will be wanted for the objects in contemplation at present, within that Department, if the value of the provisions is deducted from the monies that have been appropriated. If it is not deducted from those monies, there will be required but eighteen thousand seven hundred. The Board, however, must best know whether it will not be proper to include in the estimate the whole thirty-four thousand dol- lars, besides the ten thousand that it is supposed will be wanted for the business with the Wabash people; for, though they have been directed to apply that that sum to Indian Affairs, it has not been, I believe, included in any requisition. The sum then necessary to cover the whole will be forty-eight thousand seven hundred dollars. Besides all this, the Indians frequently receive small quantities of provisions at the different posts where they come in to visit from time to time. This is a custom derived to us from the British, and cannot be got rid of at once. It may amount to two thousand rations per annum—these have always been settled on the Commissaries Account, and do not appear as a charge against the Department—they are probably included in the estimates of the Secretary at War—the Indian Department being under his control. The ordinary expenses of the Department are as follows: The Salary of the Governour of the Western Territory as Superintendant, 800 Ditto for two Deputies at 500 each, 1,000 Ditto for two Interpreters, 400 Pay to occasional Messengers, their horses and other ex- penses, 400 Clothing from prisoners returning from captivity, say 20 pr annum at $20 400 A Storekeeper, 200 Incidental charges, 500 Presents to Indians, 1, 000 $4,700 I have the honour to be, with great respect, Gentlemen, Your very humble servant, Arthur St. Clair.
Page 196
CO 09 to to fci REPORT OF THE SECRETARY AT WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :DS] [June 12r 1789] Return rf the number rf Bratsr srulsr hrrsesr Cattler Sheep hrgsr and Waggrnsr that have passed drwn the Ohir by Frrt Harmar frrm the 10th rf Octrber 1786 tr the 8th rf May 1789 waggons 107 1rr 1r0 123 r r81 hogs 7 9 33 sheep 7r r81 817 r1 1.833 cattle rr 10 rr 797 813 2.199 horses 1.333 1.381 2.87 1.rrr 1.797 8.787 Souls 2.r89 3.19r r.370 3.81r 3.1r 18.r1 Boats 177 17r 308 703 18r 1.019 From 10lt Oct. 178r to 17th May 1787 "9'" Dec 1787. to 1r June 1788 "1r June to 7 Decern' 1788 "7 Decern' 1788 to 8 May 1789 Total The abrver reprrted tr the Secretary at war by Brigadier General Jrsiah Harmar War rffice June 12r 1789. H Knox The President of the United States [Endorsed] Return rf Brats &c which had passed drwn the Ohir between Octrber 86 & May. 90 [89]
Page 197
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 197 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Washington Papers, Letter Book 26, p. 24 :C «] New York June 14. 1789— TO THE HONORAbLE MAJOR GENERAL KNOX— Sir I have been honored with your letter of the 12th " and in reply have to observe that by the resolution of Congress of the 29th of August 1788 17 I was directed to repair to the Mississippi, in order to hold a treaty with the Indians who inhabit the country upon that river, for the extinguishing their claims to Lands within certain limits, if any such claims existed and to lay out certain donations of Land to the ancient inhabitants, from thence I was to proceed to Post St Vin- cennes upon the Wabash and lay out like donations for the inhabitants there, but the instructions contained no directions to make any pur- chase about the Post, from a presumption I suppose that a Cession had been made there to the Crown of France—With the remainder of the Goods from former treaties and the warrants I have received from the board of treasury, there is sufficient I suppose in my hands to defray the expence of the treaty with the Missisippi Indians, exclu- sive of the provisions—What they may amount to I can not ascertain, as I am ignorant of the indian numbers—they are inconsiderable; but an immediate provision for the payment of the provisions either for that or any Treaty is not necessary, the contractors being obliged to furnish all rations that may be required by the United States. Should it be thought proper to treat with the Indians of the Wabash and Miami a further sum will be necessary, and I have enclosed an estimate of what the expence would probably amount to—It appears indeed of absolute necessity that these Savages should be brought to peace either by treaty or by force. It is impossible for me to judge what sum would induce them to extend the northern boundary of the last cession to the Missisippi— Neither is it very well known what nations are the proprietors of the country that would be obtained by that extension—perhaps a pro- visional power to make such agreements and limiting the sum might not be improper, as the expence of another meeting for that purpose might be avoided if the proprietors attended at the treaty in contem- plation—The stipulations could be made then and the payments at an after period. I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient Servant sign'd) Ar Sl Clair "Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 115-117. An original draft is in the Ohio State Library. The appended enclosure is absent from both. "St. Clair Papers (OSL). "Ante, p. 145.
Page 198
198 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Estimate of the expence, with which a treaty with the Indians of the Wabash and Miami Rivers, would probably be attended, their numbers are supposed to be from twelve to fifteen hundred men. Dollars Indian goods assorted to the Value of 6000 Stores and necessaries 650 Transportation 2.500 Messengers and Interpreters 1.000 Store Keeper 300 Commissioners wages 500 Contingencies 200 11.150 The provisions can not be estimated at less than 30,0001 cqqq rations, which at contract price will amount to j 16,150 Many circumstances may occur to occasion the expenditure of a larger quantity of provisions, a lesser quantity ought not to be reckoned upon. signed) Ar St Clair SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF CONGRESS [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:ALS] Territory of the United States North West of the RrvER Ohio—July the 1"t 1789— Sir On This Day my second Official Communication becomes due, & is contained in the enclosed Sheet18— The Absence of the Governour & Death of one of the Judges19 has prevented the Adoption & Publication of Laws since the 28th of De- cember of the last Year With great Respect I have the Honour to be Sir Your most obedient Humble Servant Winthrop Sargent Charles Thompson Esqr [Addressed] Charles Thompson Esquire Secretary to Congress New York [Endorsed] Letter July 1" 1789—Winthrop Sargeant—Secy of the Govt N: West of the Ohio transmitting his half yearly communi- cations Recd Augt 20th 1789—Augt 25th 1789—transmitted a copy of this letter & the original papers enclosed to the President of the U:S20— R:Alden— 18 Journal Exec. Procs., January-July, 1789, post, III, 290. w J. M. Varnum, died Jan. 10, 1789; see Sargent to the Secretary of Congress, Jan. 15, 1789, ante, p. 187. »° Aug. 25, 1789, post, p. 204.
Page 199
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 199 TOBIAS LEAR21 TO WILLIAM JACKSON22 [SD:Misc. Letters : ALS] New York July 22d 1789 Sir, The President of the United States has drected me to return the enclosed letters to you, which he has perused—and likewise to inform you that he is now engaged in obtaining from the Secretary of War and every other channel such information relative to the situation of Indian affairs as will enable him to form a just opinion thereon.23 I am Sir with due rest Yr T. Lear Gen1Jackson P. S The President has this moment received advices from the Com- missioners who have been appointed to treat with the Indians on the part of the United States which inform him so far as he has examined them that matters are in a favorable train.24 [Endorsed] Gen1 Jackson 22d July 1789 GRAVÉ TO THE INHABITANTS OF CAHOKIA [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I-A:C] N° 13.26 Quebec 6 août 1789. A M.M. Ducharme Dubu sauries, Girardin Chatel, Du Mai, La Croix Biron habitans et Marguilliers de la St famille des Cahos aux Illinois Messieurs II y a deux ans que les superieur et directeurs du semi- naire de Quebec fondateurs et anciens proprietaires de la mission des Cahokias aux Illinois ont reçu une lettre du 6 Juin 1787, signeé comme a l'addresse cy dessus dont sans doute vous avez retenu copie. La difficulté de vous en faire parvenir la reponse nous a empeché de la faire jusqu'ici carbien des lettres que nous avions précédemment ecrites dans vos cantons avoient été interceptées ou dumoins parois- sent n'etre pas parvenues. Sans approuver les voies defait par les quelles vous vous etes emparé des biens de la mission des Cahos Je vous dirai qu'il est vrai qu'en 1768 le dit seminaire a qui appartenoit la mission des Cahokias se 21 Secretary to Washington from 1786 to the latter's death. 22 One of Washington's private secretaries, 1789-1791. 23 Reports and other papers thus assembled were communicated to the Senate, Aug. 7, 1789, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 12-54. 24 Referring to negotiations with the Creek nation, ibid., pp. 15-16, 33-34. 25 Enclosed in report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 328.
Page 200
200 TERRITORIAL PAPERS determina faute de sujets d'en abbandonner le soin a Mîr Jean 01. Briand lors eveque en titre et que le seminaire donna procuration a Mr Gibault missionaire envoyé par le dit seignieur evêque de faire casser juridiquement de concert avec les habitans de la dite mission de Cahokias toute vente et alienation faite par le Sr Forget dernier missionnaire envoyé par le seminaire de Québec des biens meubles et immoubles de la dite mission pour les dits biens etre desormais destinés aux frais et entretien des missionnaires vu que le dit Forget n'etoit aucunement authorisé a cette alienation la procuration ne subsiste plus au seminaire mais vous l'avez: conservez lâ. Souvenez vous seutement que cet abbandonnâ été fait qu'a condi- tion 1° que le seminaire n'entreroit en façons quelquonques dans les frais de recouvrement ni dans aucuns debours de quelque nature quil soit 2 que le dit seminaire ne seroit dans la suite aucunement chargé de pourvoir a votre desserte. Le seminaire na pas changé de dessein mais messieurs pour conduire cette affaire a sa perfection, et la rendre solide il faudrait un acte devant notaire qui donna a la fabrique de votre paroisse la dite pro- prieté, aux fins ci dessus enoncées avec cet acte on vous dœlivrœroit les titres et papiers concernaints la dite proprieté et pour ce faire nous ne voyons guere d'autre moyen que de deputer ad hoc quelque per- sonne intelligente d'entre vous qui en faisant peutetre d'autres affaires en Canada feroit celle lâ nous ne delivrerons point ces precieux titres sans quelque arrangement juridique. Au reste nous croyons que les negres appartenants autrefois a la mis- sion ont prescrit leur liberté et nous n'entrons aucunement dans vos vues pour les forcer a lesclavage la providence la leur adonné cette precieuse liberte a dieu ne plaise que nous consentions a ce qu'on la leur ote. Vous supposes dans votre lettre que le chapitre ou l'eveque de Que- bec avoient quelque proprieté dans le bien temporel de cette mission vous vous trompez c'est un seminaire des missions etrangeres de Quebec seul qu'ils appartenoient. Vous supposez encore que votre paroisse de la S,e famille est encore quant au spirituel sous la jurisdiction de l'eveque de Quebec mais Je vous dirai sur cela que le St Siege la soumise au prefet apostolique des etats unis et que l'eveque de Quebec n'a point reclamé vu'que vos can- tons ne sont plus sous la dominacion britannique. Voila ou en sont maintenant les choses changeront, elles? Je ne le crois pas mais Je n'en reponds pas absolument. C'est pour cela que je ne reponds pas a Mr St Pierre parceque c'est au prefet apostolique qu'il doit s'addresser pour la jurisdiction. Encore une fois il seroit bien utile que quelqu'un de vous vint a Quebec pour s'instruire et terminer avec nous une affaire que vous
Page 201
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 201 devez regarder comme tres importante pour votre paroisse et qui peut la rendre florissante. Je suis avec bien de la consideration, Messieurs Votre tres humble et obeisst servitr Grave. supr du seminaire des mission etrangeres de Quebec. [Translation] No. 13 Quebec, August 6, 1789. To Messrs. Ducharme Dubu saucies, Girardin Chatel, Du Mai, La Croix Biron inhabitants and Church Wardens of the Holy Family of Cahos in the Illinois Country. Messieurs: Two years ago the Superior and directors of the Seminary of Quebec founders and former owners of the Mission of the Cahokias in the Illinois Country received a letter dated June 6, 1787, signed as in the above address, a copy of which you have undoubtedly retained. The difficulty of sending you a reply thereto has prevented us from doing so until now, as many of the letters which we had previously written to your cantons had been intercepted or at least appear not to have been received. Without approving the violent acts by which you have taken possession of the property of the mission of Cahos, I shall tell you that it is true that in 1768 the said seminary to which the mission of the Cahokias belonged decided, on account of the lack of pupils to entrust the care thereof to Monseigneur Jean 01. Briand, at that time titular bishop, and that the seminary gave a power of attorney to Mr. Gibault, a missionary sent by the said bishop to bring about juridically, and in agreement with the inhabitants of the said mission of Cahokias the annulment of every sale and alienation accomplished by Mr. Forget, the last missionary sent by the seminary of Quebec, of the movable and immovable property of the said mission in order that the said property might hereafter be allotted to the expenses and maintenance of the missionaries, in view of the fact that the said Forget was by no means authorized to effect such alienation. The power of attorney is no longer valid at the seminary, but you have conserved it there. Bear clearly in mind that this abandonment was effected only on condition that: (1) the seminary would in no way be involved in the expenses of recovery or in any expenses whatsoever; (2) that the said seminary would not subsequently be in any way required to provide for your service. The seminary has not changed its purpose, but, Gentlemen, in order to bring this business to a satisfactory conclusion and to settle it definitely, there would be required a notarial act which would convey the said property to the vestry-board of your parish, for the purposes
Page 202
202 TERRITORIAL PAPERS above indicated. With this act the titles and papers concerning the said property would be delivered to you, and in order to do so, we hardly see any other means than to delegate ad hoc some intelligent person among you who, perhaps while transacting other business in Canada, would take care of this matter. We shall not deliver these valuable titles without some legal arrangement. Moreover, we believe that the negroes formerly belonging to the mission have gained their liberty by prescription and we by no means join in your intention of forcing them into slavery. Providence has bestowed on them this precious gift of liberty and God forbid that we should consent to their being deprived of it. You assume in your letter that the chapter or the Bishop of Quebec held some equity in the temporal property of this mission. You are mistaken. It belongs only to the seminary of the foreign missions of Quebec. You also assume that your parish of the Holy Family is still, with regard to spiritual matters under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Quebec, but I beg to advise you on this point that the Holy See has placed it under the Apostolic Prefect of the United States and that the Bishop of Quebec has made no protest, in view of the fact that your cantons are no longer under British dominion. That is the present state of things. Will they change? I do not believe so, but I cannot be absolutely sure of it. That is why I do not reply to Mr. St. Pierre, because it is to the Apostolic Prefect that one must apply as to jurisdiction. Once again, it would be very expedient for some one of you to come to Quebec to inform himself and settle with us a matter which you must consider as very important for your parish and which may make it prosperous. With the assurance of my high consideration I am, Gentlemen, Your very humble and obedient servant, Grav£ Superior of the Seminary of Foreign Missions of Quebec.
Page 203
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 203 ACT FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE NORTHWEST TERRITORY [SD:Original Statutes"] [August 7, 1789] An Act to provide for the government of the territory north-west of the river Ohio." Whereas, in order that the Ordinance of the United States in Con- gress assembled, for the government of the territory north-west of the river Ohio, may continue to have full effect, it is requisite that certain provisions should be made, so as to adapt the same to the present Constitution of the United States; Be it enacted by the Senate, and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled, That in all cases in which by the said Ordinance any information is to be given, or communication made by the Governor of the said territory to the United States in Congress assembled, or to any of their Officers, it shall be the duty of the said Governor to give such information, and to make such com- munication to the President of the United States, and the President shall nominate, and by, and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint all Officers which by the said Ordinance were to have been appointed by the United States in Congress assembled, and all Officers so appointed, shall be commissioned by him, and in all cases where the United States in Congress assembled, might by the said Ordinance, revoke any commission, or remove from Office, the Presi- dent is hereby declared to have the same powers of revocation and removal. And be it further enacted, That in case of the death, removal, resigna- tion, or necessary absence of the Governor of the said territory, the Secretary thereof shall be, and he is hereby authorised and required to execute all the powers, and perform all the duties of the Governor, during the vacancy occasioned by the removal, resignation, or necessary absence of the said Governor.28 »1 Printed also in 1 Stat. 50-53. The above text, from the original signed man- uscript, differs materially from the printed version in the matter of punctuation, some twelve changes having been made by the editor of the latter. 27 The legislative history of the act, introduced in the House of Representatives, July 16,1789, may be followed in Annals, 1 Cong., 1 sess., 51, 55, 56, 642, 659, 660. The original bill as passed by the House, with Senate amendments of Aug. 3 (second reading), which were agreed upon Aug. 4, is in the Senate files. 28 See St. Clair to the President, August, 1789, post, p. 205. No provision having been made for additional compensation for the Acting Governor, a serious diffi- culty arose in subsequent years. See also St. Clair to Sargent, Dec. 1, 1796, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 413-417.
Page 204
204 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg Speaker of the House of Representatives. John Adams, Vice-President of the United States, and President of the Senate. Approved August the Seventh 1789 G° Washington— President of the United States I certify that this Act did originate in the House of Representa- tives. John Beckley—Clerk. ROGER ALDEN 29 TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] New York—Augt 25th 1789— Sir—I have the honor to transmit, herewith enclosed, the original communications from the Secretary of the Government North West of the Ohio, and copies of his letters addressed to the late Secretary of Congress30— With the greatest respect I have the honor to be Sir—Your most obedient Humble Servant— Roger Alden The President of the United States.— [Endorsed] From Roger Alden Esquire Augt 25th 1789. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC:CC Papers, no. 78, vol. VI, fol. 415: ALS] To the President of the United States [August, 1789] A Memorial respecting the Territory of the united States north west of the River Ohio.— The Country, generally known by the appellation of the western Territory, is a Tract of Land bounded by the western Limits of Penn- sylvania on the East; by the River Ohio on the South; by the River Missisippi on the West; and by the Line of separation between the United States and the Province of Quebec on the North. This exten- 29 Alden was at the head of the home office, so-called (Jefferson to Barton, Aug. 12, 1790, P. L. Ford, ed., Writings Jefferson, v, 223), at the close of the Confed- eration period, and when the executive departments in the National Government were organized in 1790, Jefferson appointed him one of the two chief clerks, the other being Remsen, in charge of the papers relating to foreign affairs. "July 1, 1789, ante, p. 198.
Page 205
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 205 sive Region is blessed with a fertile Soil and desirable Climate in every part of it which has yet been explored; and the Inhabitants of the neighbouring States, very early discovered a strong Disposition to take Possession of it:—Congress, in order to turn that Disposition to the public Advantage, and to secure to the united States the Benefits that were expected to flow from the right to the Soil, as a fund for discharging the Domestic Debts, gave orders that it should be sold,31 and established a form of Government for the future Inhabitants: Sales have been made of some considerable Portions of it—A Number of People, from various parts of the United States have been intro- duced, and the Government has been organized. It is the Duty of the Secretary to transmit to Congress, every six Months, the Detail of the Governors proceedings, as well as Copies of the Laws that have been adopted and published by him and the Judges, who are consti- tuted temporary Legislators until the Inhabitants reach to a certain Number.—This has been done, and they will, of course, be laid before the President thro' the proper Officer.—But there are some things, that should be made known, that cannot be properly communicated in that Way, which I beg your Permission to submit to your Notice. In the Ordinance for establishing the Government there is no Provi- sion for its Administration in case of the Death Resignation or neces- sary Absence of the Governor—This is a Defect that requires to be supplied, more especially as the Management of Indian Affairs is a part of the Governors Duty, and will sometimes render his Absence unavoidable.32— The Governor and Judges or a Majority of them are to adopt and publish such Laws of the original States, Criminal and Civil, as they judge proper and best suited to the Circumstances of the Territory; and they are to be in force until disaproved by Congress. There are upon the Missisippi and Wabash Rivers a considerable Number of People, the remains of the ancient french Colony, who have been ac- customed to be governed by the Laws of France, the Customs of Can- ada, and the arbitrary Edicts of the british Commandants, after they fell under the Power of Britain:—there are also some People there, who migrated from Virginia after the Cession of the Country to the united States. A Settlement is begun between the great and little Miami composed of Emigrants from Virginia and New Jersey, but principally from the last. The Reservation, for the Virginia Officers, upon the Scioto River, has turned the*Attention of many to that part of the Country, and a Settlement will be made there, so soon as it shall be laid open, by People from Virginia and the District of Kentucky where they have been used to the Laws & Customs of Virginia.—Higher up the Ohio comes the Country purchased by the Ohio Company, which »1 Ordinance of May 20, 1785, ante, p. 14. a Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 785.
Page 206
206 TERRITORIAL PAPERS being composed of Adventurers, chiefly, from Massachusets, Connec- ticut and Rhode Island, the first Inhabitants are, and will be, from those States—Above that a gain are the Ranges of Townships part of which have been sold, and as they are now the Property of Persons in New York, Jersey and Pennsylvania the Settlements will be made by People from those States—to the north of the last is the Connecticut Reservation, which that State is now disposing of—and to the north of the Ohio Companys Tract one of the Reservations for the late Army lays.33—Laws that are to run thro' so great an extent of Country, and are to operate upon People who have very different Habits and Cus- toms require to be very attentively considered; and it would seem that they should be composed rather by an intermixture of those of all the original States, than that the Acts of any one particular State should be adopted—there would otherwise be a danger of introducing Regulations, proper enough for a small territory, which would not suit an extensive Country, circumstanced as the western Territory will be with respect to the Habits of its People. The Laws and Customs of the four New England States have a great Affinity to each other.— Persons who have lived long under any System of Law contract a Veneration for it.—The Judges, who it is to be supposed will always be professional Men, used to contemplate the Laws of the States where they have lived with a favorable Eye, and from one point of View only, will see Excellencies in each that are not so obvious to others:—each of them will have a predilection for those he has been used to:—By discussing the Principles upon which they have been respectively founded, and comparing their Operation and Effects, an intermixture that would suit the whole Country, and tend to make the Inhabitants one People, would probably be obtained, without shocking too much the prejudices of any—to that End it seems necessary that the Judges should be drawn from different parts of the united States. Two of the three Judges were from New England, and one from New Jersey34— All of them deeply interested, as Proprietors, in the Tracts of Country that had been sold. It may be a Question whether some Inconven- iencies may not arise from the last Circumstance, (for Interest often hangs, insensibly to the Persons themselves, a Biass upon the Minds of very honest and upright Men) and that the Advantage of a District might be preferred to the Interest of the Territory. That part of the Ordinance which constitutes the Governor and Judges the temporary Legislators of the Territory is not clearly ex- pressed, and requires Explanation. A Difference of Sentiment arose between the Governor and Judges upon the true meaning and design of it. The Judges contended that, from the Words, where two only of them agreed to a Law, there the concurrence of the Governor was » Resolution of Oct. 22, 1787, ante, p. 76. 3« Parsons of Connecticut, Varnum of Rhode Island, and Symmes of New Jersey.
Page 207
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 207 necessary; but where all three agreed, they had a Power to promul- gate, tho' his Concurrence should be refused. This was thought a dangerous Doctrine, and agreeable to neither the Spirit nor the Words of the Ordinance. The Governor thought it a discription of official, not numerical, Persons, of whom the he must always be one—that the true Interpretation was, that the Governor and the Judges, or the Governor with any two of the Judges shall have power to adopt and publish Laws, but the Judges without the Governor shall not have that power. It seems proper that the Governor should have power to stop a law which might be injurious to the united States, more especially when it is recollected that, as proprietors in large Districts, the Judges may have a separate Interest.—It is believed that an At- tempt would have been made to establish the Construction of the Judges had not Death removed one of them 35—In that Case, the Gov- ernor would have thought himself bound in Duty to have forbid Obe- dience by Proclamation, until the Sense of Congress on the Subject could be known, and the utmost Confusion must have ensued.38 It seems to have been the Intention of Congress that entire Laws of some of the original States, or so much of them as would apply to their Circumstances, should be adopted for the Government of the People. But it was found that the Judges were not possessed of the Codes of the different States—that few of the Laws in the Collections they were in possession of would apply, those made in the earlier Stages, and most likely to suit the present State of the Territory, having been generally repealed as the State of Society had changed.— it therefore became necessary that Laws, corresponding as nearly as possible to those of the original States, should be formed—their first formation was thought to be within the Province of the Judges in their legislative Capacity, the Governor reserving to himself the right to suggest such Alterations & Amendments as he should think neces- sary, either for the good of the People or the Interest of the united States, and finally to approve or reject them. The Laws that have been published were framed in that manner,37 and the Governors Ob- servations upon them, in the first Stage, have been recorded with the Secretary of the Territory to be laid before Congress with his other Proceedings.38 The present Governor pretends not to a knowledge of Law—He may be succeeded by another under the same Disadvantage:—He would Judge Varnum died Jan. 10,1789. See Sargent to the Secretary of Congress, Jan. 15, 1789, ante, p. 187. *1 For explanation of this issue, see ordinance of July 13,1787, ante, p. 42, n. 14. "The laws passed between July 25 and Dec. 28, 1788, are reprinted in Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xviI), 1-26, from the original printed edition of 1792 by Childs and Swaine of Philadelphia. Another printing is found in 1 Ohio Stat., Chase (ed.), 92-103. 58 Aug. 2, 1788, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 273.
Page 208
208 TERRITORIAL PAPERS therefore suggest the Propriety of appointing an Attorney General,39 with such a Salary as might be some inducement to a Man of profes- sional Abilities, and it should be declared to be a part of his Duty, to give his Opinion to the Governor upon all Laws proposed to be adopted, and to be responsible for his Opinions. The Governor by the Ordi- nance has power to appoint an Attorney General but not to give him a Salary—and if the Appointment was made by him the Attorney would be an Officer of the Territory only, whereas he should be an Officer of the United States.—It should also be made his Duty to sue for, or defend, the property of the united States in civil Cases, and this is the more necessary because, a considerable part of the Country on the Mississippi is, or will be, claimed and taken Possession of, under Grants obtained in an irregular, if not a fradulent Manner. He would also suggest the necessity of a Printer. People cannot be expected to pay Obedience to Laws they never heard of, or could hear of. and it is impossible to spread them sufficiently thro' that Country by Writing—besides that there is no fund for which the Copiers can be paid, and if there was a fund, it is believed the Expence would be equal to if not greater, than what would be incurred by establishing a printing Press. It would be convenient that an express Power should be delegated to the Governor to fix the Seat of Government where the principal Offices, & particularly that of the Prothonotary of the supreme Court, should be kept:—without that provision the Judges may think it belongs to them to determine where the Offices of their Court shall be; and as two of them are now deeply interested in particular Dis- tricts, it is not probable that a Law which should carry them, out of one or other of them, to another part of the Country could be obtained. The western Territory, taking a comprehensive View of it, is an interesting and very important Appendage to the united States— The fertility of the Soil and temperature of Climate seem to point it out as the Place to which the Emigrations from the Atlantic States should naturally be directed.—The foundation of a great additional Strength may be laid in that Country. Circumstanced as it is in many respects its Growth will probably be astonishingly rapid. It is unnecessary to enquire whether those Emigrations will not be hurtful to the Atlantic States:—the removal of so many of their People 89 See St. Clair to Symmes and Turner, July 13, 1790, post, ill, 317, relative to his intention of appointing an attorney general. See also letter to the Attor- ney General, December 1790, post, p. 319. No appointment appears, however, to have been made at that time. The first regular attorney general (Arthur St. Clair, Jr.) of the territory appears to have been appointed Sept. 10,1796, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 460. The first territorial laws touching the office, though not creating it nor describing its powers and duties, were enacted Aug. 1, 1792, and June 6, 1795 (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvII, 69, 154-160). Cf. Return J. Meigs, Jr., to Sargent, Nov. 5, 1792, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 209
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 209 suddenly, and much Property with them, must be very sensibly felt for a long time.—a regular Account is taken at Fort Harmar of all that pass down the Ohio—it is said an equal number go thro' what is called the Wilderness*—The spirit however has gone forth, and cannot now be restrained; but it may well be doubted whether the Peopling that Country will ultimately be of Advantage to the Union; or at least, before any Advantage can accrue from it, whether it may not, by means of that Population, be involved in Difficulties. The Influence of the general Government will not be much felt amongst that People, from the great Distance they are removed from the Seat of it; neither will their connection with, or dependance upon it, be very apparent.— Many of their Productions, perhaps all of them, must be the same with those of the old States—Should the Navigation of the Mississippi be open to them they would soon become Rivals, and look upon each other with all the Malevolence that usually attends such a Situation.— Should it continue interdicted, they will become Idle, restless and disatisfied.—With the English Colonies on one side and the Spanish on another, they will be exposed to the Machinations of both those Governments, and in Case of a War with one or both of them (an Event that may not be very far distant) they might be tempted to throw off all Connection with the Parent States, and put themselves under the protection of the one or the other of them. It is not to be doubted that the most alluring Hopes and Promises would be held out to them. It is certain that the British have already had Emis- saries amongst the People of the Kentucky District,40 apparently to stimulate them to Hostilities against the Spaniards, but most probably to cherish the Disposition to revolt, which has appeared there, by intimations that they would be supported from Canada. In these Transactions the british Government will not be committed, and on either Event taking Place, their purpose might be gained.—In the Case of a Revolt, the leaders might lookup both to Spain and Britian; and it seems not to be impracticable to spread it from the Frontiers of Georgia to Vermont inclusive.—In Case of Hostilities with Spain, an Alliance would probably be formed between those Nations—their joint Force would be exerted against America, while she would probably stand single; for it is not to be expected that France would support her in a Case where, prima facie, the Wrong would appear to be on her side; and to do which she must change the whole System of the political Combinations she has been preparing for many Years— The Issue would most probably be disastrous. Spain, also, looks with Jealousy and Discontent at the Growth of the western Country. Her Minister has marked its Progress with Attention, and has probably discovered that, tho it forms at present * These Accounts are in the War Office [Footnote on the MS.] 40 See St. Clair to the Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Dec. 13,1788, ante, p. 166. 128850—34 15
Page 210
210 TERRITORIAL PAPERS a part of the united States, the Ligature that binds them together is a weak one; and the Authority of the General Government over it is not well established. It is strongly suspected that he has an Understand- ing with some leading Characters, and that thro' them, the desire to throw off all Connection both with Virginia and the Union, is spread among the People. It seems likewise to be the Expectation of that Court, that the Country they possess upon the Missisippi may be peopled from the united States.—They hold out temptations that will succeed with many who have little other governing Principle beside the Desire of Wealth—a thousand Acres of Land, free of Purchase and Taxes—ten Dollars per hundred for Tobacco, and six Dollars for Pork or Beef delivered at New Orleans are offered to all who will remove into Florida, and produce those Articles. Should many People be induced to remove into that Country they will soon imbibe the spanish prejudices, and be more active to prevent any interference in this profitable Traffic than the Spaniards themselves. The Minister of that Court is also at work to divert the Emigrations from the United States to the west side of the Mississippi; and he has met with a very proper Agent, Mr Morgan, who possesses a great Degree of Activity and Insinuation. Many People now hold them- selves in readiness to follow him, infatuated to such a Degree that they are parting with very valuable Possessions on the most disadvanta- geous Terms. His Expectations, however, for laying the foundation of his Settlement, are turned to Kentucky, where there are many People who have been disapointed in obtaining Land, by the monopo- lizing Spirit that seized the first Adventures, and now hold it at Price beyond the reach of the Others; and Land being the first Object of their pursuit, they are ready to go to any Country where it can be easily obtained; But Promises of the free Exercise of their Religion;— to be governed by their own Laws; and to receive a very great Price for every thing they can raise and send to New Orleans, are super- added.—Many will make the Experiment and they and their Progeny be lost—They will become Spaniards to all intents and purposes—and should it still be designed to prevent the Navigation of the Missisippi, the Situation, directly opposite to the Mouth of the Ohio, seems not to have been ill chosen with that View. The Spanish Commandant at St Louis42 has also been assiduously endeavouring to induce the french Inhabitants to abandon their Country, and has succeeded with a great Many. Should it be thought an Object, with Congress, to prevent this loss of People and Property (for every Man carries with him more or less of it) it might perhaps be effected by laying open a part of the Western Territory for those who want Land and cannot pay for it immedi- a Don Manuel Perez (Houck, ed., Spanish Regime in Mo., i, 369-370).
Page 211
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 211 atly—The Lands upon the Missisippi and Wabash are very inviting and as Settlements are already made upon each of these Rivers would probably be preferred.—They might be set at a moderate rate and an Office opened, where any person might locate them in small Quantities, and where, upon the payment of the purchase Money, which should run upon Interest, they should receive Patents. The People, the loss of whom is the greatest any Country can suffer, would be saved—the Country would be cultivated, and the Union would derive nearly the same Advantage as if the Lands had been paid for in the first Instance; for an Interest would accrue to it, equal to the Interest accruing against it, so far as the appropriations went. This is not a visionary Project, but warranted by Experience, the whole Country of Pennsyl- vania, while it remained in the Hands of the Propritaries, having been settled in that manner. Besides it seems certain that the Sale of the Country in large Districts, if it ever was an eligible manner of dispos- ing of it, is now over; and some such Mode must be adopted if any further Advantage is expected from it. The Apprehension that the Choice Spots only would be taken, and the rest remain unregarded, is not well founded if carried to any great Degree.—The choicest Spots would doubtless be first taken, but the intermediate Lands, tho of less value, abstractedly considered, would soon be in equal Demand—A Fact which has been asscertained in every part of America where that mode of granting Lands has been practised.—It seems worth while to make the Experiment, especially as it can be done without Expence for the Fees would be a sufficient compensation to the Officers it would be necesary to employ in it. The Expectation that the Domestic Debt might be paid off, or very much lessned, by selling that Country in large Portions, was never very well founded.—The Experiment that has been made has evinced it. The real Money that has been laid out, and must still be laid out to compleat the Surveys would have bought in much more of the Debt than the Sale of the Land has brought into the Treasury. Tho', by the above method, a great Number of People, who will otherwise remove into a foreign Country, might be induced to fix within the Territory of the united States, the Danger from their insidious Neighbours would not be at all lessned. Two Things seem necessary to that End viz, that the People of Kentucky should be made easy, by being allowed to erect themselves into a separate State, and being received into the Union as a Member of it—and that the military Establishment in the western Country should be encreased. A handful of Troops, scattered in small Posts from Venango to the Mississippi, without connection or dependance upon each other, can neither awe the one nor restrain the other. It would seem to be necessary that a Force in some Degree respectable should
Page 212
212 TERRITORIAL PAPERS be stationed in that Country, and that Posts much farther advanced than the present ones should be taken.—The British, if they have ill Designs would be kept in some Check, and those Designs be more readily discovered:—Their Influence over the Savages would be lessned, and a very advantageous Trade with them, which now goes to Canada, would be turned into the united States. The People would derive Security, at the same time that they saw and felt that the Government of the Union was not a mere shadow:—their progeny would grow up in habits of Obedience and Respect—they would learn to reverence the Government; and the Countless multitudes which will be produced in that vast Region would become the Nerves and Sinews of the Union. The Connecticut Reservation is a Tract of Land lying along the western Boundary of Pennsylvania. The Deed of Cession,43 of Claims to Western Lands, made by that State to the united States takes for a beginning a Line drawn paralel to the western Boundary of Pennsyl- vania, one hundred and twenty Miles West from it, so that the Space between those lines is impliedly confirmed to Connecticut; and it was understood in Congress when the Cession was accepted, that it would be considered by the State as confirmed, and would be disposed of in what manner that Government might think proper—the Jurisdiction remains with the united States. Judge Parsons has notified the Gover- nor of the western Country that he had contracted with the State of Connecticut to run the outlines of the Tract; but, as the United States were a party in the Business, the line, to be run one hundred and twenty Miles west of Pennsylvania, being a territorial boundary be- tween them and Connecticut, and as it did not appear that they had been consulted, or even had notice of the Intention to ascertain the Boundaries, the Governor did not think proper to permit him to proceed—It may be necessary that He should receive Instructions on that Head, and that the Geographer, or some other Person on the part of the united States should attend the Survey. I have the honor to be with the utmost Respect Sir Your most obedient and most humble Servant Ar Sl Clair [Endorsed] From Arthur Sl Clair Esq. Governor of the Western Territory Augt — 178944 « Sept. 13, 1786, ante, p. 22. "For other general review of territorial conditions, see report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 323.
Page 213
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 213 COMMISSION DIRECTING THE SURVEY OF CERTAIN LANDS [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:C] [September 1, 1789] I, George Washington President of the United [L. s.] States of America. To all who shall see these Presents—Greeting: Whereas on the sixth Day of June in the Year of our Lord one thou- sand seven hundred and Eighty eight the said United States then in Congress assembled, did, among other Things Resolve That the Geog- rapher of the said States be, and he thereby was directed to ascertain by himself, or by a Deputy duly appointed for the Purpose, the Boundary Line between the United States, and the States of New York and Massachusetts, agreeably to the Deeds of Cession of the said States, and further that the said Geographer, or his Deputy, having run the Meridian between Lake Erie and the State of Pennsylvania, and marked and noted down in his Field Book proper Land Marks for perpetuating the same, should proceed to make a Survey of the Land lying West of the said Line, between Lake Erie and the State of Penn- sylvania, so as to ascertain the Quantity thereof, and make Return of such Survey to the Board of Treasury.45 And Whereas the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States by a concurrent Resolution, passed by the latter on the Tenth and concurred in by the former on the nineteenth of August last did provide "That the Survey directed by Congress i[n] their aforesaid Act of the sixth of June 1788 be made, and returned] to the Secretary of the Treasury without Delay, and that [the] President of the United States be requested to appoint a fit [per]son to complete the same46—" Now Know Ye, That in Pursuance] of the said Request I have ap- pointed, and by these Pres[ents] [The remainder of this commission is missing.] PROCLAMATIONS OF THE SPANISH GOVERNOR OF LOUISIANA AND WEST FLORIDA [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I-A:C] N° 20 47 [September 2, 1789] By his Excellency Stephen Miro Esqr Brigadier General in the armies of his Catholic Majesty, Governor and intendant of the Provinces of Louisiana and West Florida &ce. « Ante, p. 111. «» Annals, 1 Cong., 1 sess., 689. « Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 334.
Page 214
214 TERRITORIAL PAPERS A PROCLAMATION. Whereas his Majesty has been graciously pleased to permit the subjects and citizens of other countries to emigrate to his provinces of Louisiana and West Florida, by the Mississippi river with their stock, slaves, farming utensils, and household furniture, as also to introduce their property in the actual produce of the country from whence they come, promising to each family a tract of land from 240 to 800 acres in proportion to their numbers, free from all expense, as also exemp- tion from taxation, and the private exercise of their religion: Now in order to fulfil these the benevolent intentions of my royal master, and guard against fraud or imposition, I have thought proper to issue this my proclamation, making known to all persons, who may become the subjects of his Majesty, that they will be duly protected in the rights and privileges before mentioned; but all and every person so emigrat- ing, after taking the test of allegiance will be obliged, to render on oath a true account or invoice of the property they may bring down to the Governor of the district of Natches or the Commandant at l'anse a la graise, as the case may be, and solemnly to swear that no person or persons are directly or indirectly interested or concerned in the same, it being the intention of his Majesty to extend his royal bounty to actual settlers only, and any attempt to contravene this design will be punished with the utmost rigor. Given under my hand and seal at arms in the city of New Orleans, the second day of september one thousand seven hundred and eighty nine. Signed Estevan Miro Counter signed by his Excellency's command Andrew Lopes Armesto [September 6, 1789] His Majesty having been graciously pleased to encourage emigra- tion to his Province of Louisiana, he has in his royal bounty deter- mined to confer upon the emigrants the following rights, privileges and immunities. To all families consisting of two or three labouring persons, he will grant two hundred and forty acres (french measure) of land gratis: to such as consist of four labouring persons, and upwards, as far as ten, four hundred acres shall be given, when from ten to fifteen, six hun- dred; and when from sixteen upwards eight hundred acres shall be given. No person shall be molested in religious matters, though no public worship shall be allowed but that of the Roman Catholic church From the moment of their arrival in this Province, all persons shall be
Page 215
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 215 treated, and enjoy the same commercial privileges and protection as the ancient inhabitants, and shall be governed by the same laws and customs; for which purpose his Majesty will establish a commanding officer to protect the settlement against all insults. This officer will decide the controversies which may arise among the inhabitants, and all differences in matters of interest not exceeding the value of one hundred dollars. From this sum upwards the said Commander will hear the allegations of the parties, direct the proceedings, and trans- mit the same to New Orleans for the decision of this Government, unless the parties shall agree to submit their matters in controversy betwixt them to arbitration, in which case each party shall choose one or two arbitrators, and if they should not agree, the Commander shall name another to decide the matter. Every person emigrating into his Majesty's Province of Louisiana can bring his own property with him in the produce of the Country he comes from, such as peltries, tobacco, flax, hemp, cordage, flour, horses, sheep, swine, cattle salt, and all sorts of provisions, free from duties with liberty to sell them to any post of the Province, or send the same for their own account to the outposts permitted for commerce to the inhabitants; but in this latter case they are to pay the duties estab- lished for exportation which is six per cent. At their arrival every head of a family answering for every individual of it shall take the oath of allegiance to his most Catholic Majesty, binding themselves to take up arms (only in defence of this Province) against any enemy whatsoever that shall attack it. It is his Majesty's intention to establish within proper distances Parish Churches, to be served by priests that may speak the english language but who shall have no right to interfere in religious matters, with those who may not be catholics, nor shall any tythes, or other pay be exacted from them. All subjects of his Majesty, shall have a free market at new Orleans for the produce of their lands or labour, and shall be exempt from all duties and taxes. It is his Majesty's orders, that his laws shall be administered with mildness and lenity, so as to render his subjects as happy as possible; for this purpose officers who are well qualified are appointed to govern the different settlements. Given under my hand at New Orleans this sixth day of September 1789. Signed Esteven Miro.
Page 216
216 TERRITORIAL PAPERS GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SF:1 Cong., 1 sess.:C "] New York Sept 14. 1789. Sir. The constant Hostilities between the Indians who live upon the river Wabash, and the people of Kentuckey must necessarily be at- tended with such embarrassing circumstances to the Government of the Western Territory, that I am induced to request you will be pleased to take the matter into consideration, and give me the orders you may think proper. It is not to be expected Sir, that the Kentuckey people will, or can, submit patiently to the cruelties and depredations of those savages.— they are in the habits of retaliation perhaps, without attending pre- cisely to the nations from which the injuries are received.—they will continue to retaliate, or they will apply to the Governor of the western Country (through which the indians must pass to attack them) for redress;—If he cannot redress them, (and in present circumstances he cannot) they also will march through that country, to redress them- selves, and the Government will be laid prostrate.—The united States, on the other hand are at peace with several of the nations; and, should the resentment of those people fall upon any of them, which it is likely enough may happen, very bad consequences will follow; for it must appear to them that the United States, either pay no regard to their Treaties, or that they are unable or unwilling to carry their en- gagements into effect.—Remonstrances will probably be made by them also to the Governor, and he will be found in a situation, from which he can neither redress the one, nor protect the other:—they will unite with the hostile nations, prudently preferring open war to a delusive and uncertain peace. By a resolution of the late Congress the Governor of the western Territory, had power, in case of hostilities, to call upon Virginia and Pennsylvania for a number of men to act in Conjunction with the con- tinental troops, and carry war into the indian settlements.49—that resolution, it is now supposed, is no longer in force.—the revival of it might be of use, as it would tend to conciliate the western people, by shewing them that they were not unattended to;60 and would in some measure Justify me in holding a language to the indians which might obviate the necessity of employing force against them.—The handful "Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 123-124. The original letter has not been found; the present text is from a contemporary copy transmitted by the President to the Senate, Sept. 16, 1789 (Richardson, comp., Messages and Papers, I, 61). "Aug. 12, 1788, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 847-848. M See the President to St. Clair, Oct. 6, 1789, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 125-126, and the Secretary of War to Harmar, Oct. 29,1789, Harmar Papers (2 W 111), Wis. Hist. Soc. See also sec. 5, act of Sept. 29,1789, 1 Stat. 96.
Page 217
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 217 of Troops Sir, that are scattered in that country, tho' they may afford protection to some settlements, cannot possibly act offensively by themselves. I have the Honor to be Sir your most obedient and most humble Servant Signed Ar St Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] 1" Sess: L: 1" Con: Letter from the Governor of The Western Territory To The President of The United States on Hostilities of the Indians Sept 14 1789 Entd Book of Reports and Communi- cations Vol: 1. Page 105. TOBIAS LEAR TO GEORGE TURNER 51 [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] New York September 14th 1789 Sir, By the command of the President of the United States, I have the honor to inform you that you have been nominated, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, are appointed to fill the vacant seat on the bench of Judges in the Western Territory.62— If you accept this appointment, you will give due notice thereof to the President of the United States who will cause your commission to be forwarded to you at Philadelphia, and whose wish it is that you should proceed to the Western Territory and enter upon the duties of your Office without delay.63— I have the honor to be, with perfect consideration Sir, Your Most Obt Servt Tobias Lear Secretary to the President of the United States.— George Turner Esqr [Endorsed] To Major George Turner Sept. 14th 1789.— 51 George Turner was appointed from South Carolina, where he had served as an officer in the Revolutionary Army. He was nominated in the place of William Barton, who had declined appointment (Senate, Exec. Journal, l, 25, 26). 52 Made vacant by the death of Judge J. M. Varnum. ■ See W. Jackson to Turner, Dec. 23, 1789, post, p. 226.
Page 218
218 TERRITORIAL PAPERS JUDGE TURNER TO THE PRESIDENT [LC:CC Papers, no. 78, vol. XXII, fol. 405:ALS] Philadelphia, September 16th 1789 Sir, Mr Secretary Lear having officially informed me of my appoint- ment to the vacant seat on the bench of the Western Territory, I now beg leave to signify my acceptance of it; and to assure your Excellency of my best endeavours to merit the good opinion which the President and Senate of the United States have in this Instance, been pleased to entertain of me. I shall prepare, with all possible dispatch, to enter upon the duties of the appointment, in compliance with your Excellency's desire, as signified by Mr Lear. With the most perfect respect and attachment I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient and most humble Servant G Turner His Excellency President of the United States [Endorsed] From Major Geo Turner accepting his appointmt as Judge of the Western Territory Sept 16t 1789— JUDGE TURNER TO THE PRESIDENT [LC:CC Papers, no. 78, vol. xxil, fol. 409:ALS] Philadelphia, September 23d 1789 Sir, On the 16th of this month I had the honour to address you an answer to Mr Secretary Lear's communication of the 14th; and, being too late for the post, gave it in charge to Mr Richard Bache.68 But as private conveyances are often attended with uncertainty or delay, it may not be improper to observe here, that I expressed, by that oppor- tunity, my acceptance of the office for which your Excellency had been pleased to honour me with your nomination. I beg you, sir, to consider the trouble of this second letter, as offered merely to avoid any impu- tation of disrespect which a failure of my former might occasion. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your Excellency's Obliged and Most obedient humble Servant G Turner President of the United States. [Endorsed] From Major Geo. Turner—Sepf 23d 1789— «• Son-in-law of Benjamin Franklin, and Postmaster General, 1776-1782.
Page 219
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 219 INSTRUMENT OF RATIFICATION: TREATY OF FORT HARMAR [SD: Original Treaties »*] [September 29, 1789] George Washington President of the United States of America. To all to whom these Presents shall come Greeting. Whereas a Treaty between the United States and the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa, Chippawa, Pattawattima, and Sac, Nations of Indians, was in due form made and concluded at Fort Harmar on the ninth day of January last past,68 by Arthur St Clair Governor of the Territory North west of the Ohio who was duly Authorized thereto by the said states on their part, and by the Sachems and warriors of the said Nations on their part, Which Treaty is in the form and words following. Vizt (here insert it) Now Know Ye That I having seen and considered the said Treaty, do by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, Accept, ratify, and confirm the same, and every article and clause thereof.69 In Tes- timony whereof I have caused the seal of the United States to be here- unto affixed, and signed the same with my hand. Given at the City of New York the Twenty Ninth Day of Septem- ber, in the year of our Lord One thousand Seven Hundred [L. S.] and Eighty nine, and in the thirteenth year of the Sover- eignty and independence of the United States. G° Washington By Command of the President of the United States of America H Knox Secretary for the department of War [Endorsed] Ratification of the Indian Treaty concluded at Fort Harmar January 9. 1789 PROCLAMATION BY THE PRESIDENT: TREATY OF FORT HARMAR [SD:Original Treaties•l] [September 29, 1789] By the President of the United States of America A PROCLAMATION. Whereas by virtue of powers given by the United States in Congress Assembled to Arthur St Clair Governor of the territory north west of »7 This ratification is found with the treaty. w Ante, p. 174. M Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 28. M Found with the treaty.
Page 220
220 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the Ohio, and Commissioner Plenipotentiary for treating with the Indian Nations in the northern department a treaty was concluded at Fort Harmar on the ninth day of January last past by the said Arthur Sl Clair on the part of the United States with the Sachems, Chiefs and Warriors of the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa, Chippawa, Pattiwatima and Sac Nations. And Whereas I have by and with the advice and consent of the Sen- ate in due form ratified the said Treaty—Now therefore to the end that the same may be observed and performed with good faith on the part of the United States I have ordered the said treaty to be here- with published, and I do hereby enjoin and require all officers of the United States civil and military and all other citizens and inhabitants thereof faithfully to observe and fulfill the same. Given under my hand in the City of New York this twenty ninth day of September in the year of our Lord, one thousand, seven hun- dred and eighty nine, and in the thirteenth year of the Sovereignty and independence of the United States. G° Washington By command of the President of the United States of America. H Knox Secretary for the department of War. [Endorsed] A Proclamation by the President of the United States. September 29th 1789. Recordd page. 1. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers :ALS] New York 9 November 1789 My dear Sir I received your favor of the 29th of September61 a few days ago, and immediately forwarded the enclosure to your father. I thank you for your affectionate condolance on the loss of our dear boy. Involved as we are in a system governed by a mighty but invisible cause it is our interest and duty to submit to events we cannot controul. Before this you will be gratified by the arrival of the Governor and will have derived all the information you could desire of his intention of fixing the seat of Government—Were you to pursue agriculture, you would at the same time derive satisfaction and proffit—The 750 dollars although entirely precluding accumulation would then be ample for your comfortable subsistence—If in the progress of things it should should so happen, that I could assist you to any thing better I shall most chearfully seize the occasion— 11 Knox Papers (MHS).
Page 221
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 221 "Although personally I can have not the least objection, to an application for more troops being posted near Marietta yet I believe it will not be politic, and might defeat the intention The arrange- ment directed is with the entire concurrence of the President of the United States, and embraces a variety of veiws62—It seems to be a pretty prevalent opinion among the members of the eastern States that the expences for the Western territory should be rather lessened than encreased. An application might be attended with the effect of calling this opinion or disposition into activity—The estab- lishment of the troops is only to be in force untill the end of the next session—This temporary arrangement may have been dictated more with a view of retrenching than enlarging the establishment"63— The President of the United States is at present on a journey to the Eastern States. He is received every where with the most unbounded affection—men women & children of all descriptions run to see him—In a word the people by their actions demonstrate their attachment—long may he live the happiness of this Country— All France is in an uproar where it will end no man can tel[l.] The leaders appear to grasp at too much there is danger of different views being started, which lead to a long and horrid civil war I am Dear Sir Your affectionate friend— H Knox Major Sargent [Endorsed] M Gen1 Knox 9th Novr 1789 to Col. Winthrop Sargent N° 3." GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers:ALS] Ligonier Nov* 16th 1789 Dear Sir Your Letter of the 21" of last Month96 reached me at this Place two days ago—I had expected to have been with you before that time but have been unavoidably delayed and shall be yet three or four days longer, but, I think, without doubt, I shall be able to leave "Report of the Secretary at War to the President, May 23, 1789, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, n, 7-8; Knox to Harmar, June 10, 1789, Harmar Papers (2W66), Wis. Hist. Soc.; Harmar to Elliott and Williamson, contractors, July 17, 1789, ibid. (1W78). a This paragraph, as an extract, is found in the Knox Papers (MHS). The quotation marks are in the original. M The following note appears on a fold of the letter: "August lm* 1786 1264 Boats 23618 Souls 10244 Horses 2539 Cattle 2280 Sheep 687 Waggons Dec 3d 1789" « Answered Dec. 7, 1789, post, p. 223. "Not found.
Page 222
222 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Pittsburg in all next Week, for Muskingham—My stay there at this time can be but a short one, as the Winter is approaching fast, and I must reach the Kaskaskias, if it be practicable,7 This information I I gave you I think in the last Letter I wrote you from New York68 I suppose it will be necessary that you go likewise as well as the Judges or at least two of them—you will oblige me by communicating this to Judge Parsons, that he may prepare himself, for I hear nothing of Mr Turner—he may however arrive before I set out—You men- tioned in a former Letter that Mr Griffin occupied part of the House designed for me—It is now my Intention to leave some part of my Family at Marietta this Winter for the benefit of the Schools that are there, which my two youngest Daughters require—the eldest will be able to take care of them—Before this time Gen1 Harmar I suppose has left you therefor I do not write to him, but some time ago I re- quested him to send up some Men to work down our Vessel—if he has not done it, be so good to mention it to the Officer left in Command at Fort Harmar—Be so kind as to present my Compliments to Judge Parsons and my best Wishes to Mr8 Sargent and believe me ever with great regard Dear Sir Your most obedient Servt Ar Sl Clair [Addressed] Winthrop Sargent Esquire Secretary of the Western Ter- ritory at Marietta [Endorsed] Governor Sl Clair Novr 16th 1789 forwarded by Sir Yr Most Obt Sl Last Post 20 Novr 89 M. Ernest ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [LC:CC Papers, no. 78, vol. xxi, fol. 585:ALS] Marietta, Territory of the United States North West of the River Ohio Novr 27th 1789 Sir I conceive it incumbent on me to acquaint your Excellency with the Death of Sam1 H. Parsons Esqr one of the Judges of this Territory M— He had been to view some Salt Springs on a Branch of the big Beaver & on the Morn* of the 17th Inst: Embarked on Board a Canoe, with one Man only, to descend that River—Before noon on the same Day, the Boat, in a very shattered Condition, with sundry Articles of Bag- gage known to have been the Property of the Judge, were observed floating by a military Post or Station at the Falls of Beaver (four Miles from the Ohio) & the Officer commanding immediately detached a 67 In accordance with the instructions of Aug. 29, 1788, ante, p. 146. •8 Not found. "See Denny to Harmar, Nov. 22, 1789, "Denny's Journal", Memoirs Hist. Soc. Pa., VII, 446.
Page 223
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 223 Party in Search of the Bodies—but without Success. Upon the Eve* of the same Day a Soldier, who was with the deceased at the Time of his embarkation, arrived at the Post, being charged with his Horses & a Message to the Officer that he would dine with him at 12 "Clock on the same Day—the 17th— Upon the 18th & 19th the Bodies were sought after, but in vain—and we have no Intelligence since. As this melancholy Occasion has given me the Opportunity of intro- ducing myself to your Excellency, devoid of the painful Consciousness of Intrusion I will trespass so far as to express my grateful Satisfaction in the fair Prospects of our Country under the present Constitution & your Excellency's Administration With every Sentiment of Respect I have the Honour to be your Excellency's Most obedient & most devoted Servant Winthrop Sargent The President of the United States. P. S. The Governour is expected every Moment to arrive at this Place on his Way down the River—as the Waters, which have been very low, will now permit his Passage. This Tour will give me an Opportunity of visiting a Country in which your Excellency, if I am not misinformed, has formerly been conversant—If there should be at this Time, or hereafter, any Serv- ices which I can render you—or if your Excellency should be desirous of any Species of Information within my Ability to acquire, it will be highly gratifying to me to devote my Attention thereto—for it will add very much to my Happiness to contribute to your Excellency's Pleasures W Sargent [Addressed] His Excellency the President of the United States New York [Endorsed] From Winthrop Sargent Esqr Secy of the Western Terri- tory Novr 27h 1789 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [MHS:Knox Papers :ALS] Marietta December the 7th 1789 A few Days past my Dear General I was honoured with your Fa- vour of the 9th Ult:.70 I thank you for the Assurance of your Influence to promote my Interests if "Occasion should offer— Your Observation that Agriculture might afford me Satisfaction & Profit is I believe a pretty just one—but it can not be pursued, by me, '»Ante, p. 220.
Page 224
224 TERRITORIAL PAPERS to any considerable Advantage, with the proper Devotion to those Duties, which alone can entitle me to the Prospect of the 750 Dollars— I say Prospect, because I have not yet been able to obtain a Sixpence of my Pay & am living upon my Banker; & with all the Economy I am Master of, at more Expense than my Salary can admit of— The Governour has not arrived, but we every moment expect him; when we shall commence our Tour for the Kaskaskias &ca I believe & trust—But as we hear not of Judge Turner & since the Death of General Parsons there is only Judge Symmes left—the Territory must continue to suffer for the Want of Adoption and Publication of good & wholesome Laws—From various Causes there has been but Little Attention by the Gentlemen of the Bench to the important Business of their Commission.—I have given to the President General, the earliest Information of Judge Parson's Death, as it is most essential to us that he should be pleased to fill the Vacancy as soon as possible. Of Indians we hear nothing—the last Intelligence which was in a Speech from the Delewares & Wyandottees to General Harmar,71 amounted only to Professions of Friendship & has been transmitted you I suppose by the General— The Migration from the Head Waters & under the Observation of Fort Harmar from August 1" 1786 to Decr Inst: the 2d inclusive stands thus: 1264 Boats—23618 Souls, 10244 Horses—2539 Cows—2280 Sheep—687 Waggons—in which is comprehended Our Settlements— I am my Dear Sir with great Respect your affectionate Winthrop Sargent THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: N. W. Terr. Papers: LS] War Office 19th December 1789 Sir, It is to be hoped and expected that you received your instruc- tions from the President of the United States dated the 5th of October last72 since which there has not been any thing written to, or received from you at this Office. As it is highly probable that you may before this letter can reach you be far down the Ohio it may not be prudent to be very particular in my communications. The people of Kentuckey are loud in their complaints of the murders that have been committed in that district during the last summer— The President of the United States has received several letters from 71 See Harmar to Delawares and Wyandots, acknowledging their message, Nov. 11, 1789, Harmar Papers (2W121), Wis. Hist. Soc. » A.S.P., Ind. Affairs I, 96-97, and Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 125-126; both versions are dated Oct. 6,1789. The original letter has not been found.
Page 225
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 225 the Principal characters in that quarter.73 While he has directed that they be promised all the protection that he can reasonably afford, he has stated his opinion of the' effects of the desultory expeditions into the Indian Country North west of the Ohio—an extract of a letter written by his direction to Samuel McDowell Esqr Chairman of the late Convention of Kentuckey District and dated the 15th instant is as follows "The President of the United States has desired that it may be clearly understood to be his opinion that the best foundation for peace with the Indians is by establishing just and liberal treaties with them—which shall be rigidly observed on our parts, and if broken on theirs to be effectually punished by legal authority. But irregular and unauthorized expeditions involve the innocent and guilty in equal calamity—make enemies of those disposed to be friends—disgrace government and defeat its designs.74 And further that in future it is his just expectation that no expedi- tion be undertaken agains the Indians North west of the Ohio, but with the approbation of the Governor of the said Territory, and the Commanding Officer of the federal troops who are particularly in- structed on this subject."75 The President of the United States is extremely desirous of a general treaty with the Wabash Indians as the only rational foundation of peace—If a treaty of peace was once effected, any partial breaches of it by the Indians could easily be punished—He therefore requests you to use your highest exertions for that purpose. The Letters from the Wabash and Mississippi state the necessity of your presence79—It is to be hoped that you will be able to proceed and accommodate the settlers with the lands to which they are entitled. The aspect of Affairs with the Creeks require a post to be established at the Muscle shoals on the Tennassee—provided the same can be effected with the entire approbation and support of the Chickasaws and Choctaws which there is reason to beleive may be obtained—and 71 A.S.P., op. cit., I, 84-86; Col. Benjamin Wilson to Governor Randolph, Sept. 28, 1789, Col. Va. State Papers, v, 32. For subsequent developments, see the President to Congress, Jan. 8, 1790, Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, I, 65; the Secretary of War to the President, Feb. 26,1790, A.S.P., op. cit., I, 108; the same to St. Clair, Mar. 3, 1790, ibid., p. 101; the same to Innes, Apr. 13, 1790, ibid., pp. 101-102; Randolph to Lieutenant Nelson, Mar. 10, 1790, Innes Papers (LC). 74 Harmar had recommended the secret encouragement of expeditions from Kentucky against the Wabash Indians. See Harmar to the Secretary of War, Oct. 29, 1789, Harmar Papers (2W115), Wis. Hist. Soc. 7* Enclosed to Governor Randolph, Dec. 17, to be forwarded to Kentucky, Col. Va. State Papers, V, 82. "Harmar to Knox, Oct. 19, 1789 (Harmar Papers 2W115, Wis. Hist. Soc.), enclosing letters from Major J. F. Hamtramck, at Vincennes, July 29, Aug. 14 and 17, 1789, ibid. (2W89, 92). 126840—34—16
Page 226
226 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the President of the United States has directed that Major Doughty be sent to those tribes to ascertain their sentiments77—If the post be established with an adequate force it will enable us either to intimi- date the Creeks or to strike them with success. The train in which the Commissioners were constrained to leave that business bodes ill,78 and at this time it is probable that MeGilli- vray has decided with the Spaniards what line of conduct he shall pursue. I have suggested an idea to Brigr General Harmar, under the strong- est injunctions of secrecy, excepting with yourself—Please to examine it, and if practicable assist him with your advice therein—Whether in your opinion it should be practicable or not pray retain it as a perfect secret.79 If you have any blankets or shrouds in store I pray you to deliver them to Major Doughty in order to present to the Chickasaws and Choctaws. I have the honor to be With great respect Sir Your Most Obedient Humble Servant. H Knox Secretary for the department of War The Honh 1" Arthur St Clair Governor of the Western Territory [Endorsed] The Secretary at War Decr 19th 1789 about Major Doughty the Peace with the Indians and Communications to Virg* relative to their Indian expeditions WILLIAM JACKSON TO JUDGE TURNER [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] New-York. December 23rd 1789. To George Turner Esquire One of the Judges of the Western Territory Dear Sir, The communication which I now make to you though painful, is friendly, and has no other object [but] your interest. "Knox to Harmar, Dec. 19, 1789, ibid. (2W148). For accounts of Major Doughty's expedition to Muscle Shoals and its failure, see Hamtramck to Harmar, Apr. 20, 1790, ibid. (2W192); Capt. Joseph Asheton to Harmar, Apr. 19, 1790, ibid. (2W198); Doughty to Knox, Apr. 17, 1790, ibid. (2W218). 78 See report of commissioners to the Creek Indians transmitted to the Secretary of War, Nov. 17, 1789, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 63-80; instructions to commis- sioners, Aug. 29, 1789; and the report of the Secretary of War to the President, Jan. 4, 1790, ibid., pp. 65-68, 59-61. » Dec. 20, 1789, Harmar Papers (2W161), Wis. Hist. Soc. The reference is to a plan of exploring the Missouri River to its source, and all its southern branches. It was urged that the geographical relationship of these branches to the navigable streams flowing into the "Great North River" be established, and the Secretary inclosed a map of the latter for the use of such exploring parties.
Page 227
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 227 I suggested to you, when in Philadelphia] that your delay, in re- pairing to the western—Territory] would as certainly excite the Presi- dent's displeasu[re] as I was convinced it would his disappointment. Accustomed to punctuality himself, he expects to [find] it in others— especially in the discharge of those tru[sts] which involve the most interesting concerns of the [MS. torn]. You must excuse the freedom and force of thi[s] expression—it is the language of truth uttering sentiments of friendship—and better far it should be thus conveyed than take the form of an official communi- cation. The President of the United States was told, yesterday, that you were still in Philad*, and he is, indeed, much dissatisfied at the cir- cumstance. Let me request you to do away his dissatisfaction by setting out immediately for the place of your official residence, where I wish you to reap a large harvest of honorable fame and private happiness. Being very sincerely Your friend W Jackson. [Endorsed] To George Turner Esq. One of the Judges of the Western Territory December 23rd 1789 DRAFT OF A PROPOSED MESSAGE TO THE SENATE80 [LC: Washington Papers: D] [December, 1789] Although I experience a reluctance in again bringing before you the subject of a treaty with the Wabash indians, yet as some recent events have happened evincing to my mind the propriety of the measure, I conceive it to be my duty to make the following communication, and to request your advice thereon. The indians residing on the Wabash river and its branches, and the people residing on the waters of the river Ohio, have been for some years past in the practice of exercising indiscriminate hostilities on each other—It would probably be in vain at this period to endevor to ascertain the original aggressors—The facts are but too well estab- lished that the innocent on both sides suffer more frequently than the guilty. The evils have extended themselves to the troops of the United States who are often sacrificed to the resentments of the Indians, which they have had no agency in exciting. 80 This paper, undated and unsigned, is believed to be a draft of a proposed message to the Senate, which was never sent, prepared by one of the President's aides.
Page 228
228 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Several Soldiers were killed during the last year by parties of In- dians and several more during the present year, and by recent intelli- gence, a party of six, while escorting a Surveyor near the big Sandy river has been entirely cut off.81 To patiently suffer a continuance of these enormities appears to be highly improper and disgraceful—and yet in the existing confused state of affairs, and ignorance of the perpetrators, it is difficult if not impossible, to know against what tribe to direct the vengeance of the United States—This circumstance which of itself is sufficient to create a doubt of the propriety of immediate coercive measures, is rendered more conclusive by a calculation of the expence and contingencies which would attend an effectual expedition into the Indian Country. If it is probable that a peace with the Wabash indians could be effected by a treaty, I am of opinion that it would be wise to at- tempt it—If the Indians should refuse to attend the invitation to a treaty the United States would be exonerated, from all imputations of injustice in taking proper measures for compelling the Indians to a peace, or to extirpate them. The Secretary at War has infor[med] me that it is probable the treaty with the Creeks will not require more than seventeen thousand dollars of the twenty thousand appropriated by Congress on the 20th of August 1789.82 to the Indian Department—and that the Governor of the Western territory has in his possession Goods remaining from former treaties to the amount of one thousand eight hundred dollars. Although I conceive these sums to be very inadequate for treating in the customary manner with the Wabash tribes, yet perhaps it may be proper to make an experiment of treating with the indians on a more ceconomical plan. On this statement of the case I request your advice on the following inquiries. First—In the existing state of affairs between the United States, and the Wabash Indians, will it be proper to attempt an establishment of peace with the said Indians by a friendly treaty? Second—If so shall the sum of three thousand dollars (provided that sum shall remain of the twenty thousand dollars appropriated by Con- gress on the 20th of August 1789, After defraying the expences of the treaty with the Creek indians) be applied to a treaty with the Wabash tribes of Indians, together with such goods as the Governor of the western territory has in his possession remaining from former treaties? [Endorsed] Notes submitted to the President (—useless)— "Parsons to St. Clair, Aug. 23, 1789, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 120-122; Harmar to Knox, Aug. 23, 1789, Harmar Papers (2W98), Wis. Hist. Soc. S» Annals, 1 Cong., 1 sess., 688 et seq.; 1 Stat. 54.
Page 229
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 229 SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, l:ALS] Losanteville 83 2d Jany—1790— SiR I do myself the Honour to transmit your Excellency the Pro- ceedings of the Governour in his Executive Department from July last, and since his Return to the Territory84— By the Ordinance for the Government of this Country such Com- munications should have been made to the Secretary of Congress, but a late Resolution86 has induced me to suppose (though it has not expressed it) that all Official Communications, from me, as well as the Governour, should be addressed to your Excellency— If I have erred in this Opinion, I request your Excellency would put me right— Mr Charles Thompson Secretary to Congress furnished me with the Journals, to Novr 1787—If it is proper that they be continued to me, I must take the Liberty of asking your Excellency's Order to that Purpose— The Governour arrived here this Morn* & will probably be detained by public Business until the 4th when he expects to take his Departure for Kaskaskias— With the greatest Respect I have the Honour to be your Excel- lency's most obedient & most devoted Servant Winthrop Sargent— President of the United States. [Addressed] The President of the United States New York. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO MAJOR HAMTRAMCK [SF:1 Cong., 3 sess.:E «•] [January 23, 1790] Extract of a letter to Major Hamtramck at Post Sl Vincennes dated from Fort Steuben the 23d of January 1790. "It is with great pain that I have heard of the scarcity of Corn which reigns in the settlements about the Post. I hope it has been exagger- ated, but it is represented to me that unless a supply of that article can be sent forward the people must actually starve. Corn can be had 83 Losantiville, established Dec. 28,1788. The name was subsequently changed to that of Cincinnati. 84 Post, in, 316 et seq. 88 Aug. 7, 1789, aide, p. 203. M This document was enclosure no. 21 in St. Clair's report of Feb. 10, 1791, .post, p. 335.
Page 230
230 TERRITORIAL PAPERS here in any quantity, but can the people pay for it? I intreat to inquire into that matter, and if you find that they cannot do without it, write to the contracters agent here, to whom I will give orders to send forward such quantity as you may find to be absolutely necessary. They must pay for what they can of it—but they must not be suffered to perish; and though I have no direct authority from the Government for this purpose, I must take it upon myself."87 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL: St. Clair Papers: C] Boston March 19th 1790 Mr Jefferson Sir By the Treaty of Fort Mc Intosh88 the Lands contained within the following Boundary were allotted to the Wyandots & Delawares, and the Ottowas who were in actual Occupation; viz beginning at the mouth of the Cuyahoga River and running up the same to the portage between that and the Tuscarawas Branch of Muskingham; then down that Branch to the Forks at the crossing Place above Fort Lawrence; thence westerly to the portage on that Branch of the big Miami which runs into the Ohio, at the mouth of which branch the Fort stood which was taken by the french in 1752; thence along the said Portage to the great Miami or Omie River, and down the south east side of the same to its mouth; thence along the south shore of lake Erie to the mouth of Cuyahoga.—it seems to have been asumed as a principle that the whole of this Country was the property of the united States, and, by that Treaty, they gave to the Indians the Lands therein contained & the Lands lying east west and south were relinquished to the united States.—there are also certain reservations within those boundaries,89 which are declared to be to the Use & under the Government of the united States—but by the 7th Article the general principle seems to have been departed from and the Country west and north west of the Miami of the Lakes considered as the property of the Indians. By the Treaty at Muskingham90 the same Boundaries were confirmed with a small variation, which, as I have not the Treaty by me, I cannot point out,91 and certain lands laying without the Boundaries were sold and con- firmed to the united States; at the same time an express declaration was made by the Wyandots that the Country to the westward of the Miami, from its Source to the Lake, excepting the Reservations, was «»Answered Mar. 19, 1790, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 132. »»Jan. 21, 1785. »9Art. 4. 90 Treaty of Fort Harmar with the Wyandots and other tribes, Jan. 9, 1789, ante, p. 174. Art. 15.
Page 231
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 231 the property of that Nation. By the Treaty of the Miami92 a Tract of Country was op [MS. illegible] to the Shawanese by certain bound- aries, and joining to that of the Wyandots and Delawares on one side.—A west line to the river de la Panse, and with that River to the Ouabash is the boundary on another side, and the Lands lying east west and south of the east west and south Lines are relinquished to the united States—the lands then from the mouth of the River de la Panse to the Ouabash, and from thence to the Ohio, and between that River and the Shawanese & Wyandot Boundaries, have been consid- ered as the property of the united States so far at least as those Nations were interested in them—but between the Ouabash and the Ohio are the Ouiatanons, the Piankishaws, and the Miamies; with whom no Treaties have been held, and whose claims are not known with any degree of precision.—Sales have been made to individuals, before the Revolution of very considerable Tracts of Country, but without the approbation of the british Government. The whole of the Country between the Ouabash, the Illinois the Missisippi and the Ohio seems to have been considered by the French Government as the Domaine of the King—no Vestige of purchase or Cession from the Natives is to be found in the records of the Country.—The Officers of that Govern- ment either as the Agents of the Royal Company of the Indies, or immediatly of the King, granted the Lands at their pleasure, and the Officers of great Britain followed the example.93 I wish Sir I could have given you more explicit information, but explicit information I suspect cannot be obtained. I have the honor to be Sir [Endorsed] Copy to the Secretary of State 19 March 1790—giving him information of the Lands in the western Country owned by the united States LETTERS BETWEEN GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR AND THE SPANISH COMMANDANT" [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, I-A:C] N° 19. S" Genevieve 30 Mars. 1790. Monsieur, Je suis bien sensible au malheur qui est arrive' a l'un de vos officiers dans la Riviere des Cheraquis Je vous remercie d6 l'atten- tion que avez de me donner avis du batteau que vous envoy£ a l'anse a la graisse, je ne puis en profiter, vu son depart précipite mais si vous "Treaty with the Shawnee, Jan. 31, 1786. 83 See petition of inhabitants of Post Vincennes, July 26, 1787, ante, p. 58. M The following nine letters are printed as a group: they constitute enclosure no. 19 in St. Clair's report of Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 334. The French copies are here exactly reproduced. It is apparent that the copyist has introduced a number of errors. The translations are modern.
Page 232
232 TERRITORIAL PAPERS avez occasion d'envoyer quel qu'atre voiture, je vous serois obligé d'y faire passer trois esclaver appartenant a la succession du Colonel Hine- son qui sont chez moi. Si'l m'est possible, monsieur, de vous être utile vous pouvez entierement disposer de mes services. J'ai l'honneur d'etre trés parft Monsieur, Votre tres humble et obéissant serviteur. Pbyroux de la Coudreniere.95 [Translation] Ste. Genevieve, March 30, 1790. My Dear Sir: I very much regret the accident that happened to one of your officers in the Cherokee River. I thank you for your courtesy in giving me notice as to the boat which you are sending to the Anse à la Graisse. I cannot take advantage of it, in view of its precipitate departure, but if you have occasion to send some other con- veyance, I should be obliged if you would have taken on three slaves belonging to the succession of Colonel Hineson, who are at my home. If I can be of assistance to you, you may dispose entirely of my services. I have the honor to be your very humble and obedient servant. Peyroux de la Coudreniere. Kaskaskias le trente de Mars 1790. Je vous prie Monsieur d'accepter les remerciments que je l'honneur de vous faire pour tout les attentions et civilités que vous avez montre a le Major Doughty et sa petitte troupe malhereuse qui ont se refugie chez vous: pourtant que ce n'est pas que celle quon doit attendre de l'humanité et de l'urbanité de votre nation Je suis touché le plus sen- siblement que puisse etre du quel si l'occasion si present je ne man- querai pas de vous donner les preuves les plus inequivoques. Jai prit la liberté, Monsieur d'envoyer dix soldats avec un bas officier sans quel sont pourvu d'aucun passeport, pour aider le Major avec le reste de sa petite bande, de remonter la reviere et se rendre a celle ce endroit, et Je me flatte que dans le cas vous ne le trouverez pas mal apropos que je n'ai pas perdu le temps en attendant a cette formalite. Avec le respect le plus parfait J'ai l'honneur, Monsieur, d'etre Votre serviteur tres humble, et tres obeissant [Translation] Kaskaskias, March 30,1790. I beg you to accept the thanks that I have the honor to offer you for all the attentions and courtesies that you have shown to Major 88 Henri Peyroux de la Coudreniere, Spanish commandant at Ste. Genevieve. For sketch of, see Houck, Hist. Mo., I, 347.
Page 233
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 233 Doughty and his unfortunate troop who have taken refuge with you. However, that is only what one would expect from the humanity and courtesy of your nation. One could not be more deeply touched than I am, and if the occasion arises I shall not fail to give you the most unequivocal proofs of the fact. I have taken the liberty to send ten soldiers with a non-commissioned officer without any passport to assist the Major with the rest of his little band to ascend the river and pro- ceed to this point, and I feel sure that in view of the circumstances you will not consider it improper that I have not lost time in attending to this formality. I have the honor to subscribe myself most respectfully, your very humble and very obedient servant. Kaskaskias le premier d'avril 1790. Monsieur, Un nommé louvier" habitant de Prairie de Rochers m'a representé quil y â un esclave appartenant a lui qui l'avoit autrefois preté à un nomme qui est mort apres le quel il a se rendu fugitif et a etre refugie par le heretier de cette mort et est a present dans les mains de Monsieur Pratt97 comme son procureur qui vouloit l'amener a nouvelle Orleans pour lui rendre au son pretendu maitre Je suis bien certain monsieur que monsieur Pratt ne voudrez pas faire aucun pas dans le cas quil ne croit pas être juste mais comme Louviere accorde de laisser l'affaire, non obstant le decret de la cour de cette ci endroit jusqu'a mon arrivé, et monsieur Pratt voyant quil n'y a été point de reclamation de sa parte depuis il peut bien penser quil est justifie dagir suivant son procuration.—Il me semble monsieur quil est important pour les habitants de chuque coté que leur esclaves fugitifs ne pouvent point un azyle avec les autres et s'il arrive que quelques uns de votre coté voudroit se refugie chez nous Je donnerai le mains de le renvoyer et n'ayant point de doute que vous voulez faire egalement Je vous prie monsieur d'arretter le negre in question jusqu'a ce que vous soiez satisfait que le pretensions de Louver sont fonde ou outrement. [Translation] Kaskaskias, April 1,1790. My Dear Sir: A man named Louviere, habitant of Prairie de Rochers, has represented to me that he has a slave belonging to him whom he had formerly lent to a certain man who is now dead, after which he ran away and has been given asylum by the heir of the said deceased person and is at present in the possession of Mr. Pratt acting M Antoine Duchaufour de Louvieres; see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), bri. •7 Jean Baptiste Pratte emigrated from Fort de Chartres to Ste. Genevieve in 1750 (Houck, ed., Spanish Régime in Mo., I, 60).
Page 234
234 TERRITORIAL PAPERS as his agent, who wished to take him to New Orleans to return him to his alleged master. I am quite certain that Mr. Pratt does not desire to take any step in the case that he does not consider just, but as Louviere agrees to drop the matter, notwithstanding the decree of the court of this locality, until my arrival, and Mr. Pratt, seeing that there has been no claim on his part since, he may well think that he is justi- fied in acting in accordance with his power of attorney. It seems to me that it is of importance for the inhabitants of each side that their fugitive slaves do not find an asylum with the others, and if it happens that some from your side wish to take refuge with us, I shall promise to send them back, and, as I have no doubt that you are willing to do the same, I request you to arrest the negro in question until you are satis- fied whether the claims of Louvier are justified or not. St Louis ce 30 avril 1790 Monsieur, Jay recu l'honeur de votre lettre en datte d'hier88 par la quelle il paroit que vous reclamés une enfant que vous me dites etre entre les mains d'un nomé troje99 qui est venu résider sur cette rive, & qui apartien a une nomé Marguerite belleu; ceci n'est pas parvenu a ma conoissance jusqu'a present mais d'aprés vos instructions sur cet objet, Je vais immediatement ecrire au village ou il fait sa résidence, qui est a sept lieux dici et ferai incessament transporter le sus dit enfant en ce lieu par le susdit Troje afin quil puisse être remis entre les mains de ses parents, dont Je n'aurois pas souffert l'eloignement, si'Is se fussent presente a mon Gouvernement pour reclamer une chose qui apartient a l'humanité et a la justice J'espere que dans la journée de demaine ou aprés demaine vos desirs seront satisfaits; et les miens qui n'ont d'autres vû que cette de l'équtté seront parfaitement a leurs combles s'ils peuvent vous prouver par lâ combien Je suis ami de l'harmonie et de la bone intelligence. J'ay l'honeur dêtre avec respecte monsieur Votre tres humble et tres obeist serviteur Manuel Perez.— A monsr St Clair Gouverneur de territoire du n.o. des Etats Unis de l'Ohio. [Translation] St. Louis, April 30, 1790 My Dear Sir: I had the honor to receive your letter under date of yesterday, from which it appears that you have claimed a child which you tell me is in the possession of a man named Troje who has estab- 98 Journal Exec. Proca., Apr. 29, 1790, post, in, 303. n Pierre Troge; see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 626.
Page 235
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 235 lished his residence on this side, and who belongs to a woman named Marguerite Belleu. This fact had not yet come to my knowledge, but, in accordance with your instructions on this subject, I shall write immediately to the village where he resides, which is seven leagues from here, and shall have the said child transported at once to that place by the above-mentioned Troje, in order that she may be re- turned to her parents, her removal from whom I would not have per- mitted, if they had presented to my Government a claim for something which is a matter of humanity and justice. I hope that some time tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, your wishes will be satisfied, and mine, the only object of which is that justice shall be completely fulfilled, if they can prove to you thereby what a friend I am of har- mony and good understanding. I have the honor to subscribe myself, with the assurance of my re- spect, Your very humble and obedient servant, Manuel Perez. To Mr. St. Clair, Governor of the Northwest Territory, of the United States, of Ohio. [No date, 1790] Monseiur, J'ai eu l'honneur de recevoir vos deux lettres une de le trente d'avril et un que m'etoit delivré aujourd'hui—au le premiere j'aurois repondu incessament parceque Je sens parfaitement la civilite et l'attention avec les quelles vous avez traité ce que J'eus l'honneur de vous ecrire, et Je voudrois etre bien fache de manquer au reconnoi- sance convenable, mais suchant que Je aurois occasion de vous ecrire sur l'arrivé' de l'enfant que etoit chez Troje, J'ai choise de le remettre jusque au cela, au fin de vous donner si peu de la peine que possible. Au present monsieur J'ai de reconnoitre le livrance du dit enfant, et de vous informer que J'ai procedé sur les representations de la mere qui est marié chez un nommé piggot. Je crois bien qu'il y a etre une juge- ment de la cour de cette district en faveur de Troje; mais il ne se trouve pas au greffe; pourtant, Trojé ne niet pas que Piggot luiait offert pay- ment en coshons ou betes â corne si il voudroit aller les prendre chez lui nonobstant que les arbetres sur l'opinion des quels, le jugement a été fonde, n'etoit pas J'ure, et ne voudroit pas recevoir temoignage. Au- cun demand just qui Trojé peut avoir pour l'entretien de l'enfant il peut bien recouvrir, sil prendre le peine de le pour suivre en justice devant la cour, quil est presentement etablie; et cest a elle Monsieur q'appartient de decidirde controversies entres les particulieres appare- ment monsieur c'est le premiere fois qu'un enfant etoit assigne en cau- tion pour une debt. Il n'y a rien monsieur qui pouvroit me donner plus grand plaisir que de vous convaincre combien Je souhaite d'etab- lir le plus parfaite harmonie et bonne intelligence, entre le gouverne-
Page 236
236 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ments qui se trouvent a les deux bordes de la riviere, et avec combien du zele je voudrois vous seconde en rendant justice a tous aussi bien etranger qui les habitants du pais, et Je suis heureux dans l'occasion de vous assurer monsieur qu'avec le plus parfait respect, J'ai l'honneur &c [Translation] [No date, 1790] My Dear Sir: I had the honor to receive your two letters, one dated April 30th and one which was delivered to me today. I would have replied immediately to the former, because I thoroughly appre- ciate the courtesy and attention with which you have treated what I had the honor to write to you, and I should be very sorry to fail in making proper acknowledgment, but knowing that I would have occa- sion to write to you on the arrival of the child, who was at Troje's house, I decided to postpone it until now, in order to give you as little trouble as possible. At present, I have to acknowledge the delivery of the said child, and to advise you that I proceeded on the representations of the mother, who is married to a man named Piggot. I feel sure that a judgment has been rendered by the court of this district in favor of Trojé, but it is not in the office of the clerk of the court. Trojé does not deny that Piggot offered him payment in hogs or cattle, if he would come and take them to his house, notwithstanding the fact that the arbitrators on whose opinion the judgment was based, were not under oath, and would not take testimony. Trojé can collect any just claim which he may have for the support of the child, if he will take the trouble to sue for it in the court which is at present estab- lished, and it devolves on that court to decide controversies between private individuals. Apparently, this is the first time that a child has been assigned as security for a debt. There is nothing that could afford me more pleasure than to convince you how much I desire to establish the most perfect harmony and good understanding between the governments established on the two sides of the river, and with how much zeal I should like to support you in rendering justice to all, both foreigners and the inhabitants of the country, and I am happy to take the occasion to assure you that it is with the greatest respect that I have the honor, etc. [No date, 1790] Monsieur J'ai l'honeur de vous addresser la presente par la quelle Je vous instruit que Je renvoye sur votre rive la petite fille que le nomé droje1 avoit en sa possession; l'ayant interrogé sur ce qui s'etoit passé dans le tems a cet egard il ma declaré que la cour du district des Cahos 1 Troge.
Page 237
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 237 avoit rendu un jugement en sa faveur, qui lui allouoit de la part des parents de l'enfant une certaine somme pour l'indemniser en partie de ses foins pendant le tems qu'elle a été en son pouvoir;2 Je laisse a vos soins monsieur le succés du payement qui doit lui revenir, puis qu'il a été trouvé juste et équitable; et Je souhaite que le desir que J'ai de rendre justice a tout le monde tant de ceux de mon gouvernement que des etrangers lors qu'ils me la reclament puisse entretenir une union et une concorde respective. J'ai l'honeur d'etre avec respect Monsieur, Votre tres humble et tres obeisst serviteur, Manuel Perez. Monsieur St Clair Gouverneur du territoire du N. 0. de L'Ohio. [Translation] [No date, 1790] My Dear Sir: I have the honor to address to you the present letter, in which I have to advise you that I am sending to your side the little girl whom the man named Droje had in his possession. Having questioned him as to what had occurred first and last in this respect, he declared to me that the court of the Cahos district had rendered a judgment in his favor, which allowed him on the part of the parents of the child a certain sum to indemnify him in part for his trouble during the time that she was in his possession. I leave it to you to see that the payment due him is made, as it has been found just and equitable; and it is my wish that the desire I have to render justice to all persons, both those under my Government and foreigners, when they demand it of me, may maintain mutual union and concord. I have the honor respectfully to subscribe myself your very humble and obedient servant. Manuel Perez. Mr. St. Clair, Governor of the Territory Northwest of the Ohio. [No date, 1790] Monsieur Je suis bien faché d'etre oblige de vous donner de la peine encore sur un sujet simulaire le precedent monsieur Mayet vient de me plaigner q'un Monsieur la joye3 a qui il a confié une Gar- con americain, quil â été pris les sauvages, d'etre renvoyé a ses parens n'est pas fait cette renvoye mais tient le garcon en esclave et refusit de lire le garcon a lui sous pretexte de quelque dette—Monsieur Je me persuade que vous ne trouverez pas apropos q'un enfant libre sera 1 Court record, Aug. 8, 1789 (Alvord, ed., Cahokia Recs., IHC, II, 405). 5 Pierre Lajoye, formerly of Prairie du Rocher on the American aide of the Mis- sissippi (Mason, ed., Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 223).
Page 238
238 TERRITORIAL PAPERS tenu en esclave pour les dettes d'un autre—et ordonnerez a Monsieur la Joye de le rendre a Mayet. Avec tres grand respects J'ai l'honneur d'etre, Monsieur, Votre May 20th 1790 Mr Perez. [Translation] [No date, 1790] My Dear Sir: I am very sorry to be obliged to trouble you again on a subject similar to the preceding one. Mr. Mayet has just complained to me that a Mr. La Joye, to whom he has entrusted an American boy, whom he took from the savages, to be returned to the parents of the latter, has not returned him, but is holding the boy as a slave and refuses to return the boy to them on the pretext of some debt. I am convinced that you will not find it proper that a free child should be held as a slave for the debts of another—and will order Mr. La Joye to return him to Mayet. I have the honor to be very respectfully, Sir, your May 20th, 1790, Mr. Perez. S» Louis May 20.1790. Monsieur, Je viens de recevoir l'honneur de votre lettre; Je suis mortiSé de ne pas pouvoir y repondre sur le moment attendu que je prendrai tous les eclairissements necessaire pour connoitre la verity du fait, demain ou aprés demain jaurai l'honneur de vous en informer ne croyant pas cependant que les chos soyent telles quelles vous ont elé presentee— Jai l'honneur d'etre avec un profond respect Monsieur, Votre tres humble serviteur, et tres obeissant Manuel Perez. Monsieur Ar Sl Clair. [Translation] St. Louis, May 20,1790. My Dear Sir: I have just had the honor to receive your letter. I am very sorry that I cannot reply to it just at present, as I shall gather all the information necessary to ascertain the truth as to the case. Tomorrow or day after tomorrow, I shall have the honor to advise you thereof. I do not believe, however, that things are such as they have been presented to you. I have the honor to subscribe myself very respectfully, your very humble and obedient servant. Manuel Perez. Mr. Arthur St. Clair.
Page 239
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 239 St Louis le 26. May 1790. Monsieur, Pour prendre connoissance l'objet que vous reclamés par l'honneur de votre lettre en datte du 20 cour au sujet de l'enfant qui ce trouve aujourd'hui entre les mains du Sr Lajoye jai fait com- paroitre par devant moi ce dernr; qui sur les interrogations que je lui ai faitte et les raisons quil ma alleguée sur ce sujet, je n'ai trouve en lui que des dispositions a rendre service au Pere Malheureux qui la perdu et qui le reclame par une lettre dont le dit Sr Lajoye est porteur.— Apres avoir examiné avec soin cette affaire, je trouve que le susdit enfant reclamé par le Sr Mayet ne peut sortir des mains du Sr Lajoye, que pour aller entre cette du Pere actuellement habitant au Natches, Je trouve aussi quil est juste que le dit Sr Mayet soit rembourcé de ce quil a positivement donné aux sauvages pour le retirer d'entre leurs mains barbares; en consequence il est apropos quil ait a fournir son compte au Sr Lajoye, et a le moderer a une somme juste, et raisonnable, pour éviter les abus qui pourroient arriver a l'avenir: des Coureurs de bois, des vagabonds dans l'esperance de ce procurer des moyens par de telles voyes, pourroient exciter les sauvages au desordre pour le quel ils n'ont Malheureusement que trop de dispositions — Je ne puis m'empecher monsieur de vous temoigner ma surprise lors quil paroit que vous ayés pû donner croyance que cet enfant fusse esclave chez le Sr Lajoye? seroit il possible qu'un Gouvernement qui à de tout tems protegé les matheureux, qui ennemi de la tyrannie et qui ce fait gloire que l'humanité, et le bon ordre est observée dans tous les departements de sa dependance, ait pû laisser reduire a l'esclavage un jeune garçon qui à eû le malheur de tomber entre les mains des sauvages et dont le Pere est sujet de sa majesté; de pareils forfaits ne se sont jamais commis dans notre Gouvernement et si quelques particuliers osoient le faire ils seroient punis avec regueur. Lorsque le dit jeune homme arriva chez le Sr Lajoye, il vint aussitot m'enprevenir et quil ecrirait dans le bas de la Colonie pour savoir dans quel district etoit la demeure du Pere du dit enfant; Il sut depuis par la lettre dont il est porteur, quil fait sa residence au Natchez, en consequence il le fera dessendre par la premiere occasion— Jai l'honneur d'etre avec un profond respect—Monsieur Votre tres humble et très obeissant serviteur, Manuel Perez Monsieur Arthur St Clair Ecuier, Gouverneur Général des etablissements de l'ouest des Etats Unis de l'Amerique.—
Page 240
240 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [Translation] St. Louis, May 26, 1790. My Dear Sir: In order to take cognizance of the subject of the claim in your favor of the 20th instant concerning the child who is today in the possession of Mr. Lajoye, I had the latter appear before me and from the questions which I put to him and the reasons which he advanced to me on this subject I have found in him only a dispo- sition to render service to the Unhappy Father who lost him and who asks for him in a letter of which the said Mr. Lajoye is the bearer. After studying this matter carefully, I find that the above-men- tioned child claimed by Mr. Mayet can leave the possession of Mr. Lajoye only to go to that of the Father now living at Natches. I think also that it is just for the said Mr. Mayet to be reimbursed for what he actually gave the savages in order to get him out of their barbarous hands; consequently it is proper that he settle Mr. Lajoye's account, and moderate it to a just and reasonable sum, in order to avoid abuses which might arise in the future: coureurs de bois and vagabonds in the hope of procuring means for themselves by such practices might excite the savages to the disorder to which, Unhappily, they are only too much inclined. I cannot refrain, Sir, from expressing to you my surprise when it appears that you could have believed that this child was a slave in the house of Mr. Lajoye! Would it be possible that a government which has ever protected the unfortunate, which is an enemy of tyr- anny and which makes it its boast that humanity and good order are observed in all the departments under it, could have permitted a young boy to be reduced to slavery who was so unfortunate as to fall into the hands of the savages and whose father is a subject of His Majesty; such criminal deeds are never committed in our Government and if any individuals dared to do them they would be severely punished. When the young man arrived at Mr. Lajoye's house, he came and notified me of it at once and that he would write to the lower part of the Colony to learn in what district the Father of the said child lived. He learned later from the letter of which he is the bearer, that he re- sides at Natchez; accordingly he will send him down on the first opportunity. I have the honor to be with deep respect, Sir, Your very humble and obedient servant, Manuel Perez Mr. Arthur St. Clair, Esquire, Governor General of the West- ern Territories of the United States of America.
Page 241
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 241 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO RUFUS PUTNAM [SD:Amer. Letters, iv:C] New York April 7th 1790 To Rufus Putnam Esquire Sir The President of the United States desiring to avail the public of your services as one of the Judges in and over the Territory of the United States North west of the Ohio,4 I have now the honor of enclosing you the Commission, and of expressing to you the senti- ments of perfect esteem with which I am &° (signed) Thomas Jefferson THE INHABITANTS OF CAHOKIA TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SF:1 Cong., 3 sess.:C«] (N°. 14) Translation [April 28, 1790] To M. St Clair Govr Gen1 civil & military of the Illinois Country. Sir, The inhabitants of the Villages of the Cohos and Prairie du Pont take the Liberty of informing you that in Consequence of the Connection which you have been pleased to make of the Seigniory of the Cohos with the Domain of the States, in which are included the Lands and Commons set apart for their Cattle which they have pos- sessed for several Years: which Lands you have led them to hope would be continued to them." It is found that, by adding this Seign- iory to the Domain, they are deprived of a Sufficiency of Land on which to support their Cattle; and of wood not only for Building but for Fuel. It is for these Reasons, Sir, that they have recourse to your Clemency and bountiful Authority, that you may be pleased to grant them a sufficient Common surrounding their Lands, which shall commence by a Line drawn between the Land called Ottach at the End of the Morass along the Coasts, running at two Thirds of a League above the Coasts to the misissippi and taking the said Line above the Coasts in returning N. E. % North to the End of the Bounty Lands granted to them by Congress, and which are bounded by a strait Line drawn from the misissippi to that running two Miles above the Coasts. This small Portion of Land above the Coasts n'etent remplie d'enton- * Appointed Mar. 31, 1790, in place of Samuel Holden Parsons, deceased (Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 42). » Printed also in A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 20-21. This was enclosure no. 3 in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1791, ibid., pp. 18-22, and enclosure no. 14 in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 330. The translation is con- temporary; the original has not been found. * See report of St. Clair, Feb. 10,1791, post, p. 327, and sec. 5 of his proclamation, Apr. 22, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 300. UMfO-M 17
Page 242
242 TERRITORIAL PAPERS oirset basfonds which render it unfit for Cultivation, at the same Time it is of great Utility to them on acct of the wood, which they cannot do without.7 We request you Sir that when you shall be pleased to put us in Possession of the 400 Acres of Bounty Land which the Congress has granted to each Family, you will order a certain Breadth of Front in order to furnish each with 400 Acres from the misissippi to the Line which shall run two miles above the Coasts—observing that if these 400 Acres were given by a Square of 20 acres, some of them would be found to fall totally in Morass, others in wood, and others in meadow, and that each Person may suffer no Injury, lots may be cast for each parcel. We, who are faithful Subjects of the United States, expect every Thing from your Equity.8 Cohos 28. April 1790. G: Abuniere 9 At Girardin Joseph Lambert Pte Dubuyu 13 A: Harmard Ch. Ducharme dit Sanfaqon 10 Philip Engel Pierre la Perche" H B. I 14 Michele Beaulieux 12 H Biron Jean Beaulieux B. Saucier Louis Coste 7 See act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339. * The copy sent to Congress in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1791, from which this text is taken, bears the following inscription: "(signed) G. Aubuniere (and 13 others)." The remaining names have been supplied from a copy of the French text in SD Archives (Terr. Papers), which also embodies a contemporary translation of the document. 8 This is the spelling as it appears in the list of subscribers in the Department of State copy; attached to the Senate copy, as printed above, it is "Aubuniere". An unsuccessful search for this name has been made among the papers containing census records and lists of land claimants. There was a Gabriel Aubuchon in Kaskaskia in 1787 (Alvord, ed., Kask. Recs. IHC, v, 417), who, it may be conjec- tured, is the person signing this document; the misspelling of French names by copyists was the usual order. 10 Antoine Harmand dit Sansfacon, id., Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 629. 11 Laperche dit St. Jean, ibid., p. 628. a Beaulieu. » Dubuque. "Unidentified.
Page 243
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 243 MEMORIAL FROM FATHER GIBAULT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SF:1 Cong., 3 sess.:C "] N° 24, Translation 18 [May 1, 1790] To his Excellency Arthur Sl Clair, Major General of the army of the United States, Governor of the Territory possessed by the United States North west of the River Ohio &c. &c. The undersigned memorialist has the honor to represent to your Excellency. That from the moment of the conquest of the Illinois by Colonel George Roger Clark, he has not been backward in venturing his life on the many occasions in which he found that his presence was useful and sometimes necessary. And at all times sacrificing his property, which he gave for the support of the Troops at the same price that he could have received in spanish dollars, and for which however he has received only paper dollars, of which he has had no information since he sent them addressed to the Commissioner of Congress, who re- quired a Statement of the depreciation of them at the Belle Riviere in 1783, with an express promise in reply, that particular attention should be paid to his account because it was known to be no way exaggerated. In reality he parted with his Tithes and his Beasts only to set an example to his Parishioners, who began to perceive that it was in- tended to pillage them and abandon them afterwards, which really took place. The want of seven thousand eight hundred Livres, of which the non payment of the american notes has deprived him the use, has obliged him to sell two good Slaves who would now be the support of his old age, and for the want of whom he now finds himself dependent on the public, who although well served, are very rarely led to keep their promises, except that part, who, employing his time in their service, are supported by the secular power, that is to say, by the civil Government. The love of his Country and of liberty have also led the memorialist to reject all the advantages offered to him by the Spanish Govern- ment. And he endeavoured by every means in his power, by exer- tions and exhortations, and by letters to the principal inhabitants, to retain every person under the Dominion of the United States, in ex- pectation of better times, and giving them to understand that our lives and property being employed twelve years in the aggrandisement and preservation of the conquests of the united States, would at last receive an acknowledgment and be compensated by the enlightened "This document was enclosure no. 4 in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17,1791 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I,18-22), and enclosure no. 24 in that of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 335. u The original has not been found; the translation is contemporary.
Page 244
244 TERRITORIAL PAPERS and upright Ministers who sooner or later would come to examine into, and relieve us from our sad situation. We begin to see the accom- plishment of these hopes, under the happy Government of your Excel- lency, and as your Memorialist has reason to believe, from proofs which would be too long to explain here, one of the number who has been the most forward in risking his life and fortune for his country.17 He also hopes that his demand will be listened to favorably. It is this. The missionaries, like Lords, have at all times possessed two Tracts of land near this village, one three acres in front which pro- duces but little Hay, three quarters being useless by a great morass— the other of two acres in front, which may be cultivated, and which the Memorialist will have cultivated with care, and proposes to have a Dwelling erected on it, with a Garden and Orchard, in case his claim is accepted. Your Excellency may think perhaps that this might injure some of the inhabitants; but it will not. It would be difficult to hire them to cause an enclosure to be made of the size of these Tracts, so much land have they more than they can cultivate. May it please your Excellency then to grant them to the memorialist as belonging to the Domain of the United States, and to give him a Con- cession to be enjoyed in full propriety in his private name, and not as to a missionary and Priest to pass to his successor, otherwise the memorialist, not wishing to labour for others, would not accept it. It is for the services he has already rendered and those which he still hopes to render as far as circumstances may offer and he may be capa- ble, and particularly on the bounty with which you relieve those who stand in need of assistance, that he founds his demand. In hopes of being soon of the number of those who praise Heaven for your fortu- nate arrival in this Country, and who desire your prosperity in every thing, your memorialist has the honor of being with the most profound respect18 Your Excellency's Most obedient and Most humble Servant P. Gibault, Priest Kahokia May 1" 1790 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT 18 [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:ALSl Cahokia May 1" 1790 Sir I have this day communicated to the Secretary of the Depart- ment of War20 all the Intelligence respecting the Indian Affairs that 17 See James (ed.), G. R. Clark Papers (IHC, vm), intro., passim, for an account of Father Gibault's services to the American cause. "See act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 341. u Cf. official report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, post, pp. 323 et seq. n Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 136-140. Neither the original nor a con- temporary copy of this important letter has been found.
Page 245
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 245 has come to my knowledge and Observation since I wrote to him before,21 and I am very sorry to have it to remark, that they do not wear a very favorable Complexion:—That the Ouabash Indians should have taken the Resolution to be guided entirely by those of the Miami Village, is nearly tantamount to a declaration that they will continue their Hostilities;22—if Matters come to that Issue, there can certainly be no hesitation about employing force to reduce them to reason, and I hope the Legislature will not boggle at the Expense, be it what it may; for it is certainly better for a Nation, in every Case, to incur Expense, whatever may be its difficulties, than to lose Reputation: and should the Savages be suffered to insult the Government, and mur- der and rob the People with impunity, its credit would be lowered, very much, both with foreign Nations and its own Citizens.—the quietly putting up with one Injury seldom fails to prepare the way for the offering another. My Time, since my Arrival in this Country, has been chiefly taken up with the receiving and examining the Claims of the Inhabitants, which have been presented very slowly;23 partly from their extreme Ignorance, and partly from their total want of the English Language:— The Secretary being little accquainted with the french, I had re- quired a State of their Claims in English; but as not a fiftieth Man can either read or write any Language, I was obliged to dispense with that, and interpret between him and them myself. The People are reduced to the lowest Ebb of Poverty—for four Years successively the Country has been laid under Water (for the french Settlements are all in the low Grounds or River Prairies, which are very extensive.) which destroyed much the greatest part of their crops in each of those Years; and the last Season a Frost in the beginning of September destroyed nearly all their Corn—They were so much discouraged that, had my Arrival been much longer delayed, the Country would have been abandonned altogether; perh[aps] what had the principal Effect in preventing it was, that on the Spanish side the Lands are naturally less fertile, and had suffered nearly as much from the Innundations: The Spirit of Industry, which however they never possess in any great Degree, seems to be reviving, and as the Season advances [margin torn] hap- pily, and they are naturally of a sanguine temper, and look fondly 21 Mar. 7, 1790, mentioned ibid.; not found. a Hamtramck to Harmar, Apr. 20 and May 15, 1790, Harmar Papers (2W192, 244), Wis. Hist. Soc. See also Smith (ed.), "Journal of Antoine Gamelin", St. Clair Papers, II, 155-160, and A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, i, 93-94; St. Clair to the Secre- tary of War, Aug. 23,1790, Smith, op. til., pp. 155-162. The original of the latter has not been found, but there is a rough draft in the St. Clair Papers (OSL). a See Journal Exec. Procs., Mar. 7-June 11, 1790, post, III, 296 et seq.
Page 246
246 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [forjward to better times, their Misfortunes will I hope be forgotten.— I have been trying to persuade some of them to quit their Villages, where as Farmers they can never thrive, and establish themselves upon on Plantations in the higher Lands, for the Prariries are every where bounded by a steep and high Bank, at the foot of which it is very evi- dent that the Missisippi has sometime run, but they have so perfect a dread of the Savages, that, tho' they are satisfied of the truth of it, it is impossible to bring them to attempt it; tho the high Lands are both fertile and Healthy, and the Indian Commerce, which was the Resource of their Villages, has entirely forsaken them:—I suspect however they dread the Timber, with which it is covered, almost as much as the Savages; having never been accustomed to the clearing or cultivating timbered Lands. If some of the great number of Fam- ilies that are daily descending the Missisippi, and are, for a time at least, lost to their Country, could be diverted this Way, they would find a Country which would abundantly supply them with all the Necessaries and many of the Conveniences of Life, and without a great deal of Labor; for, even in the interior Country, far from the great Rivers, there are abundance of extensive Prairies, where there is nothing to do but to enclose them and put in the Plough—the Hab- its of Industry and the knowledge of Husbandry would from them be communicated to the ancient Inhabitants.—I do not know whether the design to dispose of this Country, in small Quantities to People who would settle it, has been resumed by Congress or not; but of this I am certain that, while the rage of Emigration continues, it would be good Policy to discharge a part of it here, where the People would become good Subjects, and form an effectual Barrier against future contingencies:—neither is it by any means improbable that when the Advantages which this Country offer come to be generally known, they may turn this Way of themselves, and establish themselves with- out Authority; if not in the face of it; which would introduce a Spirit of Licentiousness, hitherto unknown here, that might not be very easily repressed. The Judges are not yet arrived neither have I the least information about them:—their Absence has embarrased me a good Deal, as many Regulations, suited to the peculiar Circumstances of this part of the Country are necessary, and cannot, with propriety be established but by Law; I have been obliged however, in some Instances, to take it upon myself, after waiting for them as long as possible, and direct them by Proclamation—I have no doubt of a ready Obedience, for it is the mode to which the People are habituated, but I am sensible, that in so doing, I have gone beyond my proper Powers.24—My Excuse Sir I hope will be found in the necessity of the Case, and as the Good of the People only was in View, I cannot doubt but Laws will "See order of Apr. 25, 1790, post, in, 301.
Page 247
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 247 confirm them as soon as possible.25—One of these Proclamations respects a County which I have erected here.26 The Settlements are three principal [MS. torn] Cahokia, the Prairie du Rochers and Kaskaskia, with some sm[all] ones—not one of those contain a suffi- cient number of People [MS. torn] its being a separate County, (indeed in the whole Country taken [MS. torn] have been very much put to it to find proper Subjects to fill the different Offices) and they are at too great a Distance from each other, in present Circumstances, for any two of them to have been joined, I was therefore obliged to divide the County into Districts, and to direct Sessions of each of the Courts to be held in each District, and the Records to be kept in them in the same manner as if they had been distinct Counties:—It will be attended with the Inconvenience to one or two of the Magistrates to go to the different Places but it was impossible to concenter the Business of the whole, and confine the Courts to one Place, without putting an entire stop to the Administration of Justice. In a Letter, which I had the honor to address to you from the Rapids of Ohio, I mentioned the Information I had received respect- ing Mr Morgan in that part of the Country.—I found that he had been still busier here, if possible: in order to induce the Inhabitants to abandon the Country and follow him, he had a number of Sacks of Earth brought up from the Ance de la Graise,27 to shew them, and convince them of its very superior Quality; but his chief Argument, and that which operated most powerfully, was drawn from that Article in the Constitution of the Territory which respects Slaves.— he assured them, most positively, that they would all be liberated without any Compensation being made to the owners—He pressed them to save them while it was yet in their Power—that the Governor was then on his way, and after his arrival it would be too late—to fly if they had any regard to themselves—they had not a moment to lose:—it had the Effect to drive away many respectable Inhabitants, but not the Effect he expected, very few followed him, but they took refuge on the opposite Shore and became Subjects of Spain, which they now very heartily regret—He is now at this Moment sending away the Inhabitants of New Jersey to that Country under printed Passports directed to all civil and military Officers and requiring them to receive them as Subjects of his Catholic Majesty. Major Doughty was shewn one of those by the commanding Officer at the Ance de la Graise, who did not however very cordially accept the Greeting. By the Ordinance for establ[ish]ing the Indian Department28 the Superintendant is empowered to appoint two Deputies and a Salary of * See the President to St. Clair, Jan. 2, 1791, post, p. 320. 28 Apr. 27, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 301. "Anse a la Graisse was the former name of New Madrid in Spanish Louisiana. "Aug. 7, 1786, Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 677-678.
Page 248
248 TERRITORIAL PAPERS five hundred Dollars is annexed to the Appointment—Two Deputies, should a good Understanding be brought about with the Indians, is not sufficient [for] this extensive District, and I believe the Salary might safely be [low]ered—Persons equally capable and worthy of trust might be got I think for one half the Sum; for five hundred Dollars will not call off any Persons of much consequence from their other Pursuits, whereas to a Person who has nothing but a farm to attend to, the half of it is a considerable Object—four Deputies would not be found too many, tho hitherto I have appointed but One—but it will not be long before more will be necessary.— While I am speaking of Salarys wi[ll you] permit me Sir to mention that of the Governor—I do assure you Sir it is a very inadequate One, and I was sensible of it before I took the Office upon me—I sup- posted t]hat a little management would have secured an increase of it at the last Session of Congress, but where Money was the Object I would never in my life make use of any on my own Account—Who- ever undertakes it after me will find that it will by no means support him, in the manner that will be expected, and which the Dignity of Government requires—it is even necessary that a little Splendor should be thrown round it.—This is however the most expensive Country in the World—Money they have none, and European Goods, which are at an excessive Price, is the Measure of that, and of every- thing else—Money is the Measure of no one thing—even Linnen can- not be got washed under three Dollars the dozen Pieces.—besides the Person who will be sent to th[is] Country in the Capacity of Governor must make some Sacrifices, for which he may reasonably expect some Indemnification, independent of the long and dangerous Journies he must necessarily make both by Land and Water.—My Salary I am confident will not support me; and yet I am as careful I think as I can be without Meaness. With the most earnest Wishes for your Health and Happiness and the prosperity of the Country under your Government, and with the greatest Respect and Attachment I have the honor to be Sir Your most obedient and very humble Servant Ar Sl Clair The President of the United States P. S. I have thought proper to explain the Article respecting Slaves as a proh1bition to any future introduction of them, but not to extend to the liberation of those the People were already possessed of, and accquired under the Sanction of the Laws they were subject, at the same time I have given them to understand that Steps would probably be taken for the gradual Abolition of Slavery, with which they seem perfectly satisfied.29 [Endorsed] From His ExC Govr Sl Clair May 1" 1790 » See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 49, n. 34.
Page 249
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 249 THE INHABITANTS OF CAHOKIA TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I-A:C«»] N° 12. [May 12, 1790] A son Excellence Mr Arthur St Clair Ecuier et Gouverneur en Chef du territoire des etats unis au nord ouest de la Belle Riviere et terres adja- centes &ce. Monsieur, Les habitants qui composent les deux Villages, et district des Cahos prenne la liberté d'exposer a votre Excellence quils le croient obliger de vour supplier, de vouloir bien mettre une fin et une decision a l'entre prise qu'a fait Mr Pierre Gibault prêtre fondé de la procura- tion de M" les missionaires de Quebec par une venti aussi illicite que tenebreuse de la majeure Partie des biens fonds des exposants, quil a pris la precaution de leur cacher en abusant de la credulité de Mr Treeck31 a qui il a vendu nos dits biens sous le vain diguisement d'une pretendue procuration qu'il a fait entendre a Mr Treack qui l'hautori- soit a vendre nos biens. Nous supplions votre Excellence de vouloir bien examiner les pou- voirs de Mr Gibault dans cette procuration et nous ne doutons pas Mr que vos lumieres ne s'appercevront. D'une cupidité et aridité qui a obligé Mr Gibault a vouloir nous depouiller de nos biens qui nous ont coutés des sueurs de sang a etablir. Comme cette vente est en tous points abusive obreptive faite par Mr Gibault sans aucuns pouvoirs ni caractere de personne vente cachée et tortionnaire tendante a nous depouiller de nos bien par la voie la plus inique qu'ils a trompés manifestemant les habitants et citoiens de ce district. Mr Treack et autres qui onts acquis de Bonne foi sur l'idie Reelle que Mr Gibault etoit en droit de vendre nos dits biens, nous avons recours a l'equité et authorité de votre Excellence en la suppliant de decider elle meme de la validité ou nullité de cette pretendue vente. En faisant comparoitre Mr Gibault devant votre tribunal, ou autres cour de ce district qu'il vous plaira de nommer, avant le depart de votre excellence; pour se voir annuller, comme faux vendeur, la vente qui'l a timirairement fait a Mr Treack, et nous laisser la libre jouissance et possession des terres quil a voulu nous soustraire par sa fausse vente a Mr Treack sauf le recour de Mr Treack ou autres a qui cette preten- due vente a été transmises sus Mr Gibault ou sur le seminaire qui la fondé de ses pouvoirs—pouvoirs qui onts été aneantés par la conquete de le pais fait par les etats unis; condamnes pareillement Mr Gibault » Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 328. »1 The reference is to Col. Stephen Trigg, of Virginia, who purchased the prop- erty in 1779. See record of sale from the Kaskaskia court records, Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 77-78.
Page 250
250 TERRITORIAL PAPERS a tous les fraix des sentences a intervenir en ce district par la moien de la cassation de cette vente, nous attendons de votre Excellence notre juste demande aux Cahos le 12 Mai 1790. sa Padiste X Cabotie 33 marque Pierre X Mardin 33 Joseph X Bieget—dit Groled 84 Havie X Cabatie 35 sa Charly X Gill marque Ant. X Lacouse Badiste X Chartran Joseph Lambert 38 Pierre Cabatiez 37 Jaque X Malliot 38 sa AUGUTA X GlRARDIN 38 marque Michel X Peldie 40 Etiene Joseph Joseph X X X Ardoin 41 Deloge LaLanzete sa Pierre X Guitao marque Jean X Lapance Loran X Amelin Marin X Paniras Badiste X Hallary L' Trottier sa Louis X Le Breun marque Joseph X Boivert marque sa Pierre X Buto marque Joseph X Lacouture Charle X Germin Louis X Vadebon Francois X Gerome sa Jean X Dehai marque sa Rene X Beauvet marque Touts X St Chartran Charle X Lacroix Tomas X Ving sa Michel X Chartie marque sa Michel X Lagrave marque »2 Baptiste Cabassier; see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, n), 631. In this instance, as in many others, the contemporary copyist misread the name. In the above citation there is a complete list of heads of families in Cahokia for 1787; the late Professor Alvord carefully traced the names back to their Canadian or French origins. ■ Pierre Martin, ibid., p. 627. "Joseph Biguier dit Grosl6, ibid., p. 631. u Xavier Cabassier, ibid., p. 631. »«Ibid., p. 630. »7 Pierre Cabassier, ibid., p. 631. »» Jacques Milot, ibid., p. 630. Auguste Girardin, ibid., p. 632. « Michel Pelletier dit Antaya, ibid., p. 632. "Etienne Hardouin (Ardouin), ibid., p. 630.
Page 251
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 251 [Translation] [May 12, 1790] To His Excellency, Mr. Arthur St. Clair, Esquire, Supreme Governor of the Territory of the United States to the northwest of Belle Riviere and lands adjacent &c. My Dear Sir: The inhabitants who constitute the two villages and district of Cahos take the liberty of advising Your Excellency that they feel obliged to request you kindly to put a stop to and make a decision concerning the enterprise undertaken by Mr. Pierre Gibault, a priest holding a power of attorney from the missionaries of Quebec, for a sale as illicit as it is underhand in character of the greater part of the real property of the undersigned, which he has taken the precau- tion to conceal from them by imposing on the credulity of Mr. Treeck to whom he has sold our said property under the futile disguise of a pretended power of attorney which he gave Mr. Treack to understand authorized him to sell our property. We request Your Excellency kindly to examine the authority con- ferred on Mr. Gibault in this power of attorney and we do not doubt that your intelligence will perceive a cupidity and hardness of heart which have caused Mr. Gibault to wish to deprive us of our property, which we have had to sweat blood to establish. As this sale is in every point unfair, obreptitious, and made by Mr. Gibault without any authority or personal qualification, a secret and wrongful sale, tending to deprive us of our property in the most iniqui- tous manner, he has manifestly defrauded the inhabitants and citizens of this district. Mr. Treack and others, having in good faith arrived at the actual belief that Mr. Gibault had the right to sell our said property, we have recourse to the equity and authority of Your Excellency, with the request that you yourself decide as to the validity or invalidity of this pretended sale, by causing Mr. Gibault to appear before your tribunal, or other court of this district which you may see fit to designate, before the departure of Your Excellency, for the annulment of the sale which he, as a fraudulent seller, made on an insufficient basis to Mr. Treack, and leave to us the free enjoyment and possession of the lands of which he wished to deprive us, by his fraudulent sale to Mr. Treack, subject to the recourse of Mr. Treack or others to whom this pretended sale has been transferred against Mr. Gibault or against the seminary which conferred its powers upon him—powers which have been an- nulled by the conquest of this country by the United States, as well as to sentence Mr. Gibault to pay all the costs of the judgments to be ren- dered in this district, by means of the annulment of this sale. We await the satisfaction of our just demands by Your Excellency, at Cahos, May 12, 1790.
Page 252
252 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE AMERICAN INHABITANTS OF THE ILLINOIS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [Senate Files, 1 Cong., 3 sess.:C u] N° 7 Great Run May 23d 1790 To his Excellency Arthur Sl. Clair EsqT Governor and Commander in Chief of the Territory of the United States North west of the River Ohio. We your Petitioners beg leave to represent to your Excellency the state and circumstances of a number of distressed but faithful subjects of the United States of America, wherein we wish to continue and that under your immediate Government; But unless our principal agriev- ance can be removed by your Excellency's encouragement, we shall despair of holding a residence in the State we love. The Indians who have not failed one year in four past to kill our people, steal our horses and at times have killed and drove off numbers of our horned Cattle, render it impossible for us to live in the Country any way but in Forts or Villages, which we find very sickly in the Missisippi bottom. Neither can we cultivate our land but with a guard of our inhabitants equipt with arms, nor have we more Tilable land for the support of seventeen families than what might be easily Tilled by four of us, and as those lands whereon we live are the property of two individuals, it is uncertain how long we may enjoy the scanty privileges we have here; Nor do we find by your Excellency's Proclamation43 that those of us which are the major part, who came to the Country since the year 1783 are entitled to the land we improved at the risk of our lives, with a design to live on. Those with many other difficulties which your Excellency may be better informed of by our Reverend friend Mr James Smith, hath very much gloomed the aspect of a number of the free & loyal subjects of the United States. In consideration of which your Petitioners humbly request, that by your Excellency's command there may be a Village with inlots and outlots sufficient for families to subsist on laid out and established in or near the Prairie de Moriway we know the other american settlers near the Missisippi to be in equal deplorable circumstances with ourselves, and consequently would be equally benefited by the privileges we ask; and that those of us that came to the Country and improved land since the year 1783 may be confirmed in aright of pre-emption to their improvements, is the humble request of your petitioners; and we as in duty bound shall ever pray M a Printed also in A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 20. The document was enclosure no. 5 in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1791, ibid., pp. 18-22, and en- closure no. 7 in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10,1791, post, p. 325. « Mar. 7,1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post. III, 296. 44 This was the copy sent to Congress; it bears only the first signature and in paren- thesis: "and 45 others". The names of the other signers have been supplied from a copy in SD Archives (Terr. Papers).
Page 253
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 253 James Piggot44 Wm Biggs. Jo' Ogle. Machal Huff Geo. Ware James Henderson James Lemen. John Moore David Waddell Isaac Waddell Jesse Waddell John Mooredock John Silavan Loton Whitte George Hendrex William Murry Ebenezer Severns Benjamin Ogle Charles Wood John Porter George Atchison Isaac West Benjamin Roggers Lenard Harnes William Piggot Peter Casterland Nicholas Smith James Whitesides John Whitesides Christopher Smith Thomas Jefeos James Scott Daniel Boon Joseph Shell William Whitesides senior William Whitesides Junior Nathaniel Hull William Chafan Isaac Chafan Samuel Worley John Jack James Bryon David Guise Robert Seybold Shadrach Bond James Garetson LANDS CLAIMED BY INHABITANTS OF KASKASKIA [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I-A:C"] N° 1. A list of lands claimed by the inhabitants of Kaskaskias, in the territory of the United States north west of the river Ohio.47 Archabald M'Ndbb Four hundred acres on Kaskaskias river, on a small run, called M°Nabb's run.48 John Rice Jones49 Four acres, nearly adjoining the village of Kaskaskias, one hundred and sixty acres nearby on the east side of Kaskaskias river "For sketch of, see Philbrick(ed.), Laws Ind. Terr. (IHC, xxI), cclxi. "Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10,1791, post, p. 323. See Journal Exec. Procs., Mar. 7 and 24, 1790, post, ill, 296, 297. ° For a thorough, documented account of7 land claims in the Illinois country, predicated on ancient grants, donations to heads of families, improvement rights and militia rights (acts of Aug. 28, 1788, and Mar. 3, 1791, ante, p. 144, and post, p. 339), see Philbrick (ed.), Laws Ind. Terr. (IHC, XXI), hcv-xcv. For the same, see also A.S.P., Pub. Lands, 11, 123-258, containing the report of the board of land commissioners, 1810, which embodies tables of claims founded upon the various categories above mentioned, those rejected and those affirmed. Diagrams shoving the location of the various claims are included in the report. » See grant to, Sept. 12, 1782, Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 349, and confirmation, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, n, 153. ■ For the various claims of, and their fate, see A.S.P., op. ext., pp. 144, 148,151, 155. 156, 158, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 175, 177, 193, 212, 215, 216, 218, 225, 228, 229.
Page 254
254 TERRITORIAL PAPERS John Rice Jones A house and lot in the town of Kaskaskias, A house and lot in the village, claimed as attorney for Azor Rees. Jacque Sheinor.60 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias A tract one and a half arpents broad, and extending from the Kaskaskias river, to the Mississippi John Baptiste Gondron.*1 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias A tract of one arpent in breadth, and extending from the common fence to the Mississippi Jacob Judy62 Two lots in the town of Kaskaskias. Antonie Buyat63 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias A piece of land, two arpents and a half broad, and close to the Indian village, the kaskaskias river in front, and the big wood behind. Antonie Bienvenu,*4 A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias— A lot in the common, a piece in the plains, another piece in the plains. A piece close to the Indian village, and on Kaskaskias river, two lots in the town of Kaskaskias. Antonie Bienvenu Jim1.6* A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land, in the Indian meadow. A piece of land in the Melique medow. A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias Micheal Danis58 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias A piece of land in the Indian meadow. A piece of land in the Melique meadow. A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias. John Edgar.67 A house and two lots in the town of Kaskaskias. A house, and four other lots in ditto. A house and three acres, a barn and three acres. A barn and lot of one and a half acres. A lot in the common of about thirty acres. A house, orchard, and land about ninety acres. About thirty six acres adjoining the above. A tract of about one hundred and thirty five acres on the common. A lot of about eight acres on the common. A tract of about ninety acres on the common. A tract of about forty five acres. A tract of about one hundred and thirteen acres, a tract of three arpents and eight perches, from common fence, to Mississippi. Two tracts of an arpent in breadth, each from common fence to Mississippi. Cladius Le Mieux. A lot, in the town of Kaskaskias. Raymond Normand Labrieu.6* A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. M Probably Jacque Shignie, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, II, 153. "Ibid., pp. 142, 145, 163, 177, 192, 202. *Ibid., pp. 170, 177, 218. » Ibid., pp. 162, 217. "Ibid., pp. 177, 178, 217. "Ibid., pp. 176, 177, 178, 180, 227. »Ibid., pp. 163, 178, 227. "Ibid., pp. 203, 205. See index, ibid., for other citations to John Edgar's claims. ■ Labriere, ibid., pp. 144, 218, 229.
Page 255
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 255 Francis Janis.6* Four lots in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land, of an arpent and a half from the common fence to the Missis- sippi. A piece of eight perches and ten feet, from the common fence to Mississippi Nicolas Janis60 A piece of land, one arpent, four fathoms and four feet wide, in the plain of Kaskaskias, A piece, two arpents and four feet wide in the plain of Kaskaskias. A piece in the plain two arpents wide. A piece two arpents, four fathom, and two feet wide— A piece, two arpents wide. Three lots in the town of Kaskaskias. Peter Prevost91 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land by the Indian village half an arpent broad. A piece of land, one arpent broad. Joseph Louis Longval.*2 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land, in the plain of Kaskaskias two arpents wide. A piece two arpents wide, and ten long, close to the Indian village. A piece of land, in the plain of Kaskaskias, one arpent wide. Charles Danish A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land, in the plain of Kaskaskias one arpent wide. A piece of land close to the Indian village half an arpent wide. Lewis Chamberland. Two lots in the town of Kaskaskias. Three lots in the town of Kaskaskias A piece of land in the plain of Kas- kaskias one arpent wide. A piece in the plain, one arpent wide. Stephen Page A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias half an arpent wide. A piece of land in the plain, two arpents wide One ditto, one arpent wide. One ditto, three arpents wide One ditto one arpent wide. One ditto, half an arpent wide One ditto. Three lots in the town of Kaskaskias John Baptiste Janis Jun* A house and lot in the town of Kas- kaskias. James Morency. A lot in the town of Kaskaskias The widow of James Seguine la Deroute A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. Anthony la Chapell64 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land in the plain, one arpent and three perches wide. The widow of Micheal Godin*6 A lot in Kaskaskias town. One ditto in the common, one arpent square.—A piece of land half an ar- pent wide, in the plain of Kaskaskias. One tract half an arpent wide. One tract, one quarter of an arpent and one half an arpent wide, all in the plain of Kaskaskias. » Ibid., pp. 170, 175, 179. «Ibid., pp. 163, 177, 178, 225. « Pierre Prevost, ibid., p. 228. "Ibid., pp. 218, 228. See Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, v), 415. ■ A.S.P., op. cit., p. 227. M Antoine Lachapelle, ibid., pp. 170, L77. »Ibid., p. 163.
Page 256
256 TERRITORIAL PAPERS John Baptiste Crely. Two lots in the town of Kaskaskias Alexis Beavais M A tract in the plain of Kaskaskias, one arpent wide. A tract close to the Indian village, half an arpent wide. A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. The widow of Peter Limba, A free negroe. A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. The Widow Racine97 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. Half an arpent of land of a triangular form, and a piece to make it square. A tract at the Indian village, three arpents and two perches in front. Part of a tract of land, at Prairie du Rochers, with a lot one arpent square in the village. One third of the mill on the creek in the hills of Prairie Oc hassin. A tract of three arpents, in front, in Prairie Du Rochers. A tract of more than two arpents in front on the main line, at Kaskaskias—A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A lot adjoining the village of one arpent. A tract of land in the Prairie du Rochers, of six arpents in front, and a house lot. The widow of John Francis Bachi, A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land three leagues from Sl Phillips village three arpents wide Nicolas Canada 68 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. John Baptiste Montrieul68 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias, thirty six feet by one hundred. A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias. nine perches and eight feet wide. John Baptiste Thomar Casource70 Cahos. Two lots in the town of Kaskaskias. A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias one arpent and a half wide. Antonie Peltier Antaya.71 A house and lot in the town of Kaskas- kias the lot, one arpent square. Blaise Barulel dit Thoulouse A lot in the town of Kaskaskias, twenty five fathoms wide, one lot one arpent square A piece of land in the medow of Melique one arpent wide. A piece of land in the plain of Kaskaskias, one arpent wide at Kaskaskias river, and four at the Mississipi Bartholomew Tardeveau72 A house and lot in the village of Kaskas- kias, one hundred toises in front and sixty one toises in depth. A lot in the town of one arpent in front. A tract of land on the east side of Kaskaskias river, in depth from the King's road to the hills, and four arpents, or thereabouts in front. « Beauvais, A.S.P., op. cit., pp. 180, 181, 227. •7 Ibid., p. 228. - Ibid., pp. 141, 178. - Ibid., pp. 181, 228. 70 Of Cahokia, ibid., p. 179. » Ibid., pp. 162, 220. 71 Heirs of, ibid., p. 164.
Page 257
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 257 Widow de Gagne.73 A lot joining Micheal St Etienne, in the town of Kaskaskias. A tract of an arpent in front from the Mississipi to Kas- kaskias James Theullere Designe A lot in the town of Kaskias. A piece of land two arpents and three perches wide, from the common fence to the Mississipi. Louis Seguine la Denite74 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias Joseph Derouse St Peire.™ A lot in the town of Kaskaskias John Cook.™ A lot in the town of Kaskaskias A piece of land, an arpent, and three perches wide, from the common fence to the Mis- sissipi.—A piece of an arpent in breadth near the Indian village, from Kaskaskias river to Mississipi. Joseph Thibault,77 A lot in the town of Kaskaskias Paul Racine. A lot in the town of Kaskaskias. LIST OF INHABITANTS AT KASKASKIAS 78 [SD:N.W.Terr. Papers, i-A:C ™] Liste des habitans des Kaskaskias, qui y etoient residens avant 1783.— 73 Gagnon, ibid., p. 228. "Louis Sequin dit Laderoute, ibid., p. 237. » St. Pierre, ibid., p. 147. »Ibid., pp. 141, 149, 162, 180, 181, 235. "Ibid., p. 229. 78 This and the following two census reports, without date, are placed at this point because the information was gathered during the period of St. Clair's offi- cial visit to the Illinois country in the summer of 1790. There are probably more complete and more accurate lists in the following works: Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Records (IHC, II), 624-632; id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 414-423; Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 198-228. The following papers are not the originals, which have not been found; it is apparent that the names have suffered at the hands of copyists. » Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 323. 80 Devignais. 81 Creilly. 82 Bienvenu dit Delisle. 88 Godin dit Touranjeau. 64 Jean Baptiste Lasource dit Thaumur. 126«5O-34 18 N° 2. Jacques Devegnet,80 Jean Baptiste Crely.81 Antoine Bienvenus fils.1 Michel Danis. Jerome Danis Veuve Godin Tourrengeau.1 Jean Baptiste Thomur.84 Francois Janis.
Page 258
258 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Jean Baptiste Montreiiil.85 Louis Longval. Joseph Longval. Blaise Barutel. Joseph Doza. Jean Baptiste Lasource86 Veuve Bazile Lachapelle. Francois Derousse St Pierre. Etienne Page\ Jacques Chenier. Nicolas Henault Canada. Antoine Bienvenus Pere.87 Jean Baptiste Gendron. Jacques Merensy.88 Antoine Buyat. Louis Laderoute. Jean Baptiste Laderoute. Jean Baptiste Lachanse. Paul Reaume. Philippe de Rocheblarce89 Joseph Barutel, fils. Francois Thibault.90 Veuve Racine. Jacques Gopieux.91 Alexandre Lalarcede.92 Antoine Peltier. Joseph Derousse Sl Pierre. Michel Derousse Sl Pierre. Charles Danis. Alexis Beauvais. Louis Germin.93 Claude Lemieux. Pierre Prevost. Antoine Capou.94 Jean Baptiste Derouse St Pierre. Raimond Labriere. Veuve Alarry.95 Jean Baptiste Alarry. James Orr. James Curry. Archibal Macnabb. Francois Carbonneaux. Noms des habitans des Kaskaskias qui y sont venus depuis 1783. John Simpson. John Cook. Hugh Chisholm. John Edgar. John Rice Jones. Louis Allaire. Jacob Jeudy. 88 Montureuil. 84 There were two heads of families of the same name; see Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 415. 87 Antoine Delisle, sr., dit Bienvenu. M Morancy. M Not on the lists compiled in 1787; see Alvord (ed.), op. ext., pp. 414-419. •» Tibault. m Gossiaux. 9»Lalande. "Germain. M Unidentified. "Alary.
Page 259
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 259 CENSUS OF CAHOKIA [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, I-A:CM] N° 22 Recensement des habitants chef de familles des Cahokias.*7 Jean B»« Dubuque cap™ de Milice Jean Bl« Bergeron Joseph Poupart « Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 335. "The following names may be identified with the aid of the works cited in the previous document. 88 Lapancg. » Trottier. 1 Mathieu Saucier. 2 Unidentified. * Lefevre. 4 For sketch of Thomas Bredy, see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 627. 5 Alternative spellings: Pourpar; Pourpard. •Or Cesirre. 7 Beaulieu. • Blin. •■ Gaud. Joseph Lapensee88 Philipe Gervais Francois Trotier M Mathi Saucier 1 Francois Saucier La Bunier N2 Baptiste Saucier Xavier Lapenseé Pierre Lafieur Charle Le fevre3 Thom Brady4 Leon Lepage Paul Poupart5 Jean Bt« Labecasse Joseph Cecire 8 Laveuve Joseph Lepage Charles Cadron Henry Biron Pierre Laperche Laveuve Michel Baulieu7 Louis Le Brun Laveuve George Blain > Louis Chatel Louis Trotier Louis Bergeron. Antonie Harmonie Joseph Marie Clement Trotier Louis Le Comte Louis Gault81 Pierre Durbois Louis Coste Francois Lonval. Laveuve Gabriel Baron Le Nomme Campaun Jean Marie Dorion Joseph Buteau Laveuve Turgeon Laveuve Michel Charly Laveuve Francheville Nicolas Boismenu Antoine Boyer Jean B" Deshays Le Nomme Mulot Charle Ducharme Dion B" Mercier Louis Pilet
Page 260
260 TERRITORIAL PAPERS LIST OF FAMILIES AT THE PRAIRIE DU PONT [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, I-A:C •] N° 23 List of the families at the Praire du Pont.10 Piere Martin Joseph La Lancett27 Jean Baptiste Allary Francois Gerome28 Louis Biquet dit Grottel11 Joseph Peltier29 Louis de Longchamp 12 Charles Lacroix30 Antoine La Course 13 Piere Guitarier31 Exavier Cabasier14 Joseph Lambert Jean Baptiste Labasier 16 Philip Engel Charle Germain 18 Antoine Gerardin32 Michel Antia17 27 Ellen AS" Widow Bequet^~~ Aman TelUer » Widow Hanson" Jaaue Ma Hot21 Widow Cabasier Jaque Mall1ot Widow Le May Lorain Amel1n22 wrj™ ru„~<Zi„ Joseph Lacoutre23 JS4ow £hartran JeanLapence- W1dow G1rard1n Thomas Ving25 b Charles Gill Bachelors keeping house Joseph Deloge28 Antoine Cabasier • Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 335. 10 Cf. list as printed in Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., iv, 207-208. 11 Louis Biguier dit Grosl6; see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, n), 631. 12 Louis Deslongchamp, ibid., p. 628. 12 Antoine Lacource, ibid., p. 629. M Xavier Cabassier, ibid., p. 631. 15 Jean Baptiste Labecasse, ibid., p. 631. "Charles Germain, ibid., p. 630. » Michel Pelletier dit Antaya, ibid., p. 632. 19 Pierre Godin dit Turanjean, ibid., p. 631. "Etienne Hardouin, ibid., p. 630. 20 Amant Tellier, ibid., p. 630. 21 No such name has been found. It is possible that Maillet (Mayet), a name with many variants, is meant, though the Christian name (Jean Baptiste) does not correspond. See index to present volume. 22 Laurent Hamelin dit Grondine; see Alvord (ed.), op. cit., pp. 247, 261. 22 Joseph Chatingy dit Lacouture, ibid., p. 631. 24 Jean Lapanc6, ibid., p. 625. 25 A Thomas Wine is found (t&td., p. 296, n. 1) and a Thomas Winn, id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 422. 28 Joseph D61oge; see Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 205. 27 Joseph La Lancete, loc. cit. 2» See Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, n), 632. 29 Peltier (Pelletier); see Mason (ed.), op. cit., p. 205. 20 Charles La Croix, ibid., p. 207. 21 Pierre Guitar, ibid., p. 220. 22 Girardin, ibid., p. 206. 22 Becquet; see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 189. ,4 Henson, ibid., p. 151.
Page 261
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 261 Piere Cabasier Augustin Girardin Branchon Gabriel Tellier Marine Paincrass Riche Bapt Chartran Tousaint Chartran Thomas Chartran Rene Bouvel35 Jean Guitare Piere Guitare Louis Perio36 dit Verdibencauer Louis Le May Joseph Cabasier 17 bachelors Charles Cabasier DEPOSITION OF JOSEPH LA BUSSIERE [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I-A:C"] N° 11. [May 29, 1790] Je soussigné, ancien notaire royal sous le Gouvernement Francois à la demande de Monsieur Le Gouverneur St Clair aux Ilinois et depen- dances, certiffie sous mon sermant quil y a enviren trente trois out- rente quatre ans que par ordre de Monsieur De Macarty,38 Major Commandant aux Ilinois, et de Mr Buchet39 commissaire aux pays je me suis transporté aux cahos de ma demeure au fort de chartre pour publier aux cahos un jour de dimanche à la porte de l'eglise une decla- ration du Roi qui faisoit deffences aux missionnaires des Cahos de signer à la venir a donner aucun ne terres en concession a qui que ce soit et ordre a ceux qui avoient des concessions de ces missionaires de les raporter aufort de chartre, pour leur, en etredonnes d'autresaunom du Roi que la dite declaration casse. Et ensuite tous titres seigneur- iaux donnes par les Commandants aux dits missionaires que sa majesté n'entendoit pas quil y eu dans sa colonie de la Louisianne d'autre seigneur que lui. Et fait deffences aux dits missionaires de prendre la qualité du seigneur a la venir ce que je certiffie etre le precis de la dite declaration dont Je ne me rapelle pas des termes positif par le nombre d'années qui se sont ecules la quelle declaration jay lué publieé et afficheé à la porte de l'eglise du dit lieu des Cahos a l'issus de la messe paroissiale, et que L'original en a resté entre les mains de Monsieur de Macarty ou de Mr Buchet, Je certiffie en outre avoir oui dire aux per- sonnes en place de ce tems, que les missionaires avoient tenté mai inutillement a faire ratiffier leur titre de concession par la cour de France et quil n'avoit jamais pû y parvenir, cest ce que je puis me rapeler a mon souvenir enfoy de quoy j'ay donné le present a Monsieur le Governeur St Clair pour servir ce quil pour a valoir aux Cahos le 29 May 1790. 35 René Bouvet, ibid., p. 143. m Louis Perian, ibid., p. 631. »» Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 328. M Lieutenant de Macarty Mactique, French commandant at Fort de Chartres until 1760 (Alvord and Carter, eds., Critical Period, IHC, x, 183). «9 Jacques Timothé de Monbreun. Labussiere.
Page 262
262 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Before me Arthur St Clair Governor of the territory of the United States, north west of the Ohio personally appeared Joseph La Bus- siere, and being duly sworn, did declare that the above writing made by him, and subscribed with his own hand, contains the truth, and noth- ing but the truth to the best of his memory, and recollection. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal at Caho- kia the 29th day of May 1790. A;; St Clair. (l.s.) [Translation] I, the undersigned, former royal notary under the French Govern- ment, at the request of Mr. St. Clair, Governor of the Illinois country and dependencies, certify on my oath that about thirty-three or thirty- four years ago, by order of Major Macarty, commander of the Illi- nois country, and of Mr. Buchet, commissioner of that country, I went to Cahos from my residence at Fort Chartre, in order to publish at Cahos on a Sunday at the door of the church a declaration of the King, which forbade the Cahos missionaries to sign in the future or give any concession of lands to anybody whomsoever, and ordered those who had concessions from such missionaries to return them to Fort Chartre in order that others might be given to them in the name of the King, and the said declaration annuls such concessions, as well as all seignorial titles given by the commanders to the said missiona- ries, as it was the intention of His Majesty that there should be no seigneur in his colony of Louisiana other than himself; and forbids the said missionaries to assume the status of seigneur in the future, which I certify to be the substance of the said declaration, the exact terms of which I do not recall, owing to the number of years which have elapsed. I [certify that] I read the said declaration as published and posted at the door of the church of the said locality of Cahos at the close of the parochial mass, and that the original thereof has remained in the possession of Mr. Macarty or of Mr. Buchet. I further certify that I have heard it said by persons in authority of that time that the missionaries had made vain attempts to have their title of concession ratified by the French court, and that they had never succeeded in doing so. That is what I am able to recall to mind. In faith whereof I have given this document to Governor St. Clair to use as he sees fit. Cahos, May 29, 1790. La Bussiere.
Page 263
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 263 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO ANTOINE GIRARDIN [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:C] By His Excellency Arthur Sl Clair Esqr the Governor of the Territory County of St Clair, and District of Cahokia. May the 29t h 1790.— To Antoine Gerardin Esquire.— Sir—You being appointed to Survey for the Inhabitants of the District of Cahokia the Lands they rightfully claim & were Possessed of, on or before the Year 1783 in order that the same may be confirmed to them conformably to the Resolutions of Congress40 and the Powers Vested in me by the United States for that Purpose; You are hereby requir'd and directed to Survey, lay off and bound for the Persons herein after named, at their own expense the several tracts of Land annexed to their names—those Persons being the Inhabitants of the District who have produced their Claims to me. And you are to return into the Office of the Secretary of the Territory a Plat of the several Surveys so by you made, specifying the Time when they were made, and the Quantity in superficial Measure, as soon as may be, that Patents of confirmation may Issue.41— For Joseph La Buissere N° 1. a Piece of Land one Arpent in Breadth, from the Hills to the Mississippi in the Prairie du Pont, between L'Ambert and Peltier. N° 2 a Piece of Land one Arpent in Breadth and the same length joining Charmond—on the North-East and Courville—on the South West. N° 3 Another Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth in the Prairie du Pont, Joining his other Land on one side and Antoine Harmand on the other and the same Length.— Joseph La Bussiere the Son. Two Arpents in Breadth, and the Usual Length at the Grosse Point.— Antoine Gerardin Four Hundred Acres of Land Near the Sugar Loaf.— Phillip Engal42—N° 1—Four Hundred Acres of Land at the Place called the Sugar Loaf whereon he had made an Establishment but was Interrupted by the Savages before 1783.—N° 2 Two Lots at the Village of Prairie du Pont.— Francois Aubremane 43 a Lot at the Little Village of Prairie du Ponts. on which he lives.— Atigustion Gerardin—N° 1—A Lot 150 Feet square—at the Village of the Prairie du Pont.—N° 2 a Piece of Land one Arpent in Front from the River to the Hills— - June 20 and Aug. 28, 1788, ante, pp. 112, 144. "See Journal Exec. Procs., June 1, 1790, post, m, 307. « Engel. "Unidentified.
Page 264
264 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Marie Riviere Turgeon"—N° 1 a Piece of Land one Arpent in Front, from the River to the Hills at the Cul du Sac Joining Alexander on one Side and La Bussiere on the other. N° 2 a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Front, from the Rigolet to the Hills Joining Nicholas Gervais on one side and Raphael Gagné on the other. N° 3 an other Piece of Land from the Rigolet to the Hills of an Arpent in Breadth Joining Madam La Pagé on one side and [blank] on the other Jean Baptiste du Buque N° 1 a Piece of Land one Arpent and a half, in front, from the Rigoulet to the Hills, and near the Village of Cahokia Joining Francois Sausier on one side, to N° 2 a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth from the River du Pont to the Hills in the Cul du sac, Joining George Blain on one side and Gerardin on the other.—N° 3 another Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont an Arpent in Breadth from the River Mississippi to the Hills, Joining Amelin on one side and on the other Jean Baptiste La Croix, now Gerardin's.— Joseph La Buissere N° 1 a Piece of Land two Arpents in Breadth, from the River to the Hills, in the Prairie du Pont Joining L'Ambert on one side and on the other Amante Teltier.—N° 2. another Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills, in the same Prairie, Joining Amant Peltier on one side, and Amelin on the other.— Joseph La Bussiere the Son a Piece of Land of two Arpents in Breadth from the Mississippi to the Hills. Joining Laurent Hamelin on one Side, and a Parallel Line on the other Antoine Gerardin a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills in the Prairie du Pont, Joining Jean Baptiste du Buque on one side, and Jean Baptiste Alary on the other. Lewis Le Brun N° 1 a Piece of Land of an Arpant in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills in the Prairie of the Village Joining Clement Alary on one side and on the other Joseph Marie. N° 2 Another Piece of Land, half an Arpant in Breadth at the Bois Coupé, from the Rigoulet to the Hills. Joining Louis Coste on one side and on the other Francois Trottier. N° 3 Another Piece at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent in Breadth, from the River to the Hills Joining the Widow Blain on one Side, and on the other the Widow Turgeon. Louis La Brun. a Piece of Land of an Arpent in front at the Prairie du pont, from the River Mississippi to the Hills Joining Charles Germain on one side, and on the other Antoine La Course. The Widow of Joseph Le Page—A Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Francois Courrier on one side, and on the other Francois Saucier. Antoin Le Page A Piece of Land in the Prairie at the end of the Village, of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills, Joining Joseph Buland on one side and on the other Philip Gervais. "For account of family, see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 626.
Page 265
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 265 Joseph Le Page a Piece of Land in the Prairie of the Village, of Two Arpents in Breadth, from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Louis Pillet4S on one side, and on the other the Widow Turgeon. Louis Coste. N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent and an half in front from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining La Chance on one side. and on the other Louis Le Brun. N° 2 another Piece of Land of an arpent in Bredth at the Bois Coupe, from the Rigoulet to the Hills, Joining the Widow Blain on one Side, and on the other Pier La Fleur. N° 3—another Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth at the Prairie of Brise Culote, from the little River to the Hills, Joining La Fleur on one side and on the other Paul Paupard 49 The Widow Beaulieu N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of Cahokia, of two arpents in Breadth, from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining the Widow Turgeon on one side.—N° 2 another Piece of Land in the same Prairie, of two Arpents in Breadth, from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Bullard N° 3 another piece of an Arpent in Breadth at the Bois Coup6 from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Martin on one side and Cudin on the Other The Widow of Michel Girardin. a piece of Land in the Prairie du pont Three Arpents in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Jean Baptist du Buque on one side and on the other Jean Baptist du Bois whereon is a Stone House & other Buildings. Piere La Fleure N° 1 a piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining La Pensé on one . side and on the other Louis Coste. N° 2. another piece of Land at the Brise Culote of an arpent in Breadth from the river to the Hills, Joining Louis Coste on one side and Francois Saucier on the Other Piere La Fleure a piece of Land in the prairie of the Gross Liard of an Arpent in front from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Louis Le Brun on one side and on the other Louis Gaud. Nich' Boismence 47 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of Cahokia of an arpent in Breadth, from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining on one side the Minors of La Pierre and on the other Widow Beaulieu. Louis Pillet. N° 1 a piece of Land in the Prairie of Cahokia of an Arpent in front from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining La Perche on one side, and on the other to that Used by the Priests. N° 2 another Piece of Land at the Brize Culotte, of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining the Widow La Page on one side, and on the other Jaque Milot. Louis Pillet a piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth at the Prairie du pont, from the River to the Hills, Joining Joseph La Pense on one side, and Benjn Clermont on the Other. « Louis Pilet, ibid., p. 626. "Paul Poupar, ibid., p. 627. « Boismenu, ibid., p. 628.
Page 266
266 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Louis Chat el A piece of Land of an Arpent and a Quarter in Breadth in the Prairie of the Gross-Liard, from the River to the Hills Joining Philip Gervais on one side and the Hiers of Cretien on the other. Francois La Pense N° 1 a piece of Land of an Arpent in Front at the Bois Coupe from the Rigoulet to the Hills, Joining Piere La Perch on one side, and Henry Biron on the other. N 2 Another piece of Land at the Bois Coup6 of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Piere La Fleure on one side and on the other Baptist Mercier— Michel Pillet A piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth at the Bois Coupe from the Rigoulet to the Hills, Joining Baptist Mercier on one side and on the other the Widow Beaulieu— Piere Dubois48—N° 1 a piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills, close to the Village, and adjoining the Widow le Boeuf on one side, & the Widow La Page on the other.—N° 2. An other piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth at the Prairie du pont, from the Mississippi to the Hills Joining Gerardin on one side and Joseph des Loges on the other.— Phillipe Gervais N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of Cahokia, of an arpent and an half in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Clement Alary on one side, and on the other the Widow Turgeon—N° 2 another Piece of Land of three Quarters of an Arpent in front in the same Prairie from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining the Heirs of Joseph 1'Page on one side & on the other Louis Chattel Jean Piere Roy dit La Pense49 N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Cul de Sac, of two Arpents in Breath from the River to the Hills, Joining Guitar on one side and on the other Antoine La Cource—N° 2 an other piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth in the Prairi du pont, from the Hills to the Mississippi, Joining on the one side Debonceur— and on the other Louis Grosli— Antoin Gerardin—A lot at the Prairie du Pont where-on is Built a Stone House not finish'd and a Mill and the Land about it, the Lot where the House is contains three Hundred feet on each face, and Joins Philip Engel on the South, a great Road towards the North, the Canal of the Mill on one face, and a Street on the Other.— Piere Guyon dit Guitar— N° 1 a lot at the Village of the Prairie du Pont 150 feet Square lying on the Great Road in front, Grounds of the Lancette behind, a Cross Street on one side, and Francois Gerorome on the Other.—N° 2 a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth at the Cul du Sac from the River to the Hills Joining Jean Roy dit La Pense and Joseph des Loges 48 Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 629. «Ibid., p. 625.
Page 267
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 267 Joseph L'Ambert. A lot of 361 1/2 feet long by 130 feet in Width or thereabout, at the Village of the Prairie du Pont, one side Joining the River Du pont, an other on the great Road. Joseph Des Logis50 N° 1 a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du pont of 150 feet square, on one side a Street, behind on the Common, on an other side a Street that seperates it from Tho" Winn, and the other on the Common. N° 2 a Piece of Land at the Cul de Sac of two Arpents in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Piere Guyon on one Side, and on the Other Augustin Gerardin. Jean Baptist Chartran N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Cul de Sac lying between Branchant, & Antoine La Cource,—from the River to the Hills. N° 2 a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du ponts, of 150 feet on Each side, Joining the Street that divide it from Coste on one side, the Street between it and Peltier on another side, Charles on a Third Side, and Tho" Winn on the fourth— Joseph La Couture—A lot at the Prairie du Pont, of one Hundred and fifty feet Square where-on his House is Built— Jaques Millot N° 1 a Lot at the Village of the Prairie du Pont of one Hundred and fifty feet on each side, bounded on one side by a Cross Street, on an other by the Grounds of the Villiage and the other two by Louis Gaud and the Common—N° 2 a Piece of Land at the Prairie of Brize Cu-lotte of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Louis Pellit on one side, and on the other Lands which have been abandoped. Andre Bequet A Lot at the Village of the Prairie du Pont of one Hundred and fifty Feet on each face whereon is his House. Piere Godin A Piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth, from the River to the Hills Joining Gabriel Merleau. and on the other side Jean Baptist Du Buque Jean Marie Dorion81 N° 1 a piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent in Breadth, from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Piere Martin on one side, and on the other one called Rele. N° 2 another piece of Land at the Bois Coup6, of an arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills, Joining Baptist Mercier, on one side, and on the other Piere Cretian.— Louis Trottier N° 1 a piece of Land at the Prairie du pont of an arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Forgit la pense and Charles Germain. N° 2 another Piece of Land at the Brize Culotte of an Arpent in Front, and in Depth from the River to the Hills Joining Jean Baptist des Hayes and Louis le Comte. N° 3 an other piece at the Prairie of Brize Culotte, of half an Arpent in 50 Joseph Poirier dit Desloges, ibid., p. 630. •1 Ibid., p. 626.
Page 268
268 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Breadth from the Hills to the River, Joining Paul la Fleuir, and Jean Baptist des Hayes— Louis Trottier— a Piece of Land at the Brize Culotte of an Arpent Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Joseph Buliard, and Land that has been abandoned.— Charles Guay63 N° 1 a piece of Land at the Cul de Sac of three arpents in Breadth from the River to the Hills, Joining Tho" Winn & Louis Girole N° 2 A Lot in the Village of the Prairie du pont of one Hundred and Fifty Feet square joining on one side Baptist Chartran on an other Joseph des Loges, and Streets on the two other Sides. Jean Baptist Alary N° 1 a Lot at the Village of the Prairie du pont, of three Hundred Feet long and one hundred and Fifty Feet Wide Joining Pier Martin and Augustin Gerardin on two Sides and a Street on the third and Vacant Lands on the Fourth.—N° 2 a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Front runing from the above Lot to the Hills, and Joining Antoin Gerardin and a Person call'd Garrison.— Clement Alary N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth, from the Hills to the Fence which Bounds the Vil- lage, joining Charles Germain and Antoin la Cource N° 2 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of the Gross Liard, of half an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining Louis le Brun and Philip Gervais— Charles Germain—N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Prairie du Pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the Hills to the Fence which bounds the Village joining Louis Trottier and Clement Alary.—N° 2 another Piece of Land in the same Prairie of an Arpent in Breadth, from the Mississippi to the Hills where his house Stands:— Jacquet Maillot A Lot in the Village of the Prairie du pont, of an Arpent in Length and half an Arpent in Breadth, Joining Joining Charles Garmain on one side, Michal Peltier on the other, a Street before and the Common behind— Thomas Winn N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Cul de Sac of three Arpents in Breadth from the River to the Hills, Joining on one side Vacant Lands and on the other Charles Gill.—N° 2 a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du Pont, of one Hundred and Fifty feet square, having a Cross Street before, Joseph des Loges behind, on one side Baptist Chartian, and the Commons on the othei"— Francois Gerome—A Lot in the Village of the Prairie du Pont of one Hundred and Fifty Feet Square whereon is his House— Joseph Peltier A Lot in the Village of the Prairie du Pont of one Hundred and Fifty Feet Square, joining L'ancette on one side, Francois Gerome on another a Street upon an other side, and the great Street before.— B Unidentified.
Page 269
NOR'THWEST TERRITORY 269 Louis Perian A piece of Land at the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth, from the River to the Hills Joining Benjamen Clermont & Jean La Pense Armant Tellier N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining La Bussiere on both sides.—N° 2 a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du Pont, of one Hundred and Fifty feet Square lying on the great Road and having the Common behind, Etienne Ardouin on one side, and on the other. Piere Cabassier N° 1 a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du pont whereon his House stands and other Buildings, an Arpent in Length and half an Arpent Wide—N° 2 a Piece of Land at the Cul de Sac of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Augustin Gerardin and the Widow Turgeon. N° 3 an other Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Joseph Souspre on one side and Gabriel Tellier on the other.— Gabriel Tellier A piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Bois Vert on one side, and Piere Cabossier on the other Michel Chartier A Lot in the Village of the Prairie du pont, of one Hundred and Fifty Feet Square, having the great Street in front, the Common behind, the Widow May on one side and Piere Goden on the other.— Joseph Boisvert64 A Piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills Joining Gabriel Tellier and Gabriel Merleau— Etienne Ardouin A piece of Land at the Prairie du pont, of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining René Bouvet and Joseph Poupart— Rene Bouvet A Piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Piere Durbois & Etienne Ardouin.— Piere Durbois 55 A piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont of an Ar- pent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Charles Germain and Rene Bouvet. Louis Gaud No 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of the Gros Liard of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills, Joining Henry Biron and Piere La Fleure N° 2 a Piece of Land at the Bois Coup6 of an Arpent in Breadth, from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining Louis Des long Champs— Louis Des long Champs N° 1 a Piece of Land joining the Village of Cahokia of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills— and having Francois Saucier on one side and Mr Du Buque on the M Boisverd; see Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 208. "Pierre Durebois, ibid., p. 218.
Page 270
270 TERRITORIAL PAPERS other—N° 2 an other Piece of Land at the Bois Coupe* of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining Louis Gaud and Louis le Compte. N° 3 a Lot at the Prairie du Pont of one Hundred an fifty feet square joining Louis Grosle\ Michel Peltie dit Antaya N° 1 a Lot at the Prairie du Pont, of one Arpent Long and half an Arpent Broad whereon his House is Built. N° 2 a Piece of Land in the Prairie at the Place call'd the Sugar Loaf, joining Antoin Gerardin on one side, and the Run from the big Hill on the other and from the Mississippi to the Hills— Paul Poupart—N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of Brise Cu- lotte of two Arpents in Breadth from the River to the Hills, joining Louis Costé & Louis Trottier—N° 2 an other piece of half an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills at the gros Liard joining Jean Baptiste Becasse and the Heirs of La Pierre. N° 3 an other piece of the same Prairie of half an Arpent Broad, from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Sans facon and Joseph Trottier— Louis Periau A lot in the Village of the Prairie du pont, of one Hundred and fifty Feet square joining at one end Baptist Cabassier, a large Street at the other end, not yet laid out; on one side Antoin la Cource, and Vacant ground on the other— Piere Garsien N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Prairie du Pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the Hills to the Village, with the exception of a Part one Arpent and an half long and an Arpent Broad, which belongs to Philip Engel joining Baptist Alary and Joseph la Pense—N° 2 a Lot in the Village of one Hundred and Fifty Feet square joining Louis des long Champs on one side and having Streets on the other Three— Joseph Biquier67 N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Mathieu Saucier and Jean la Pense—N° 2 an other Piece at the Cul de Sac from the River to the Hills of an Arpent in Breadth joining Thomas Winn, and Michel Peltier—N° 3 a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du Pont of one Hundred and fifty Feet Square joining Baptist Char- tran, and Jean le Pense on two sides, and having Streets on the other two.— Louis Le Comte N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Prairie of Brise Culotte of an Arpent and an half in Breadth from the River to the Hills, joining the Widow Tabout68 and Louis Trottier—N° 2 an other Piece in the Prairie of the gros Liard of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining the Minors of Languedac and the Widow Bergeron.— The Minors of Joseph Languedac N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of the gros Liard of half an Arpent Broad from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining the Heirs of Chretien, and Henry Biron.—N° 2 an- "Joseph Biguier dit Grosl6; see Alvord (ed.),Cahokia Recs. (IHC, U), 631. « Tabeau, ibid., p. 629.
Page 271
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 271 other Piece in the same Prairie of an Arpent Broad, from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining Louis Long Champs and Louis Le Comte.— Basil le Bauf59 a Piece of Land of an Arpent and an half in Breadth at the Bois Coupé from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining the Heirs of Chretien on both sides— Mathieu Saucier a Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont of two Arpents in Breadth, from the Mississipi to the Hills, joining Joseph Bequier and Joseph L'ambert.— Pierre Branchant60 a Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont in the Cul de Sac of an Arpent in Breadth from the Hills to the River joining Louis Groslé and Baptiste Chartran— Joseph des Loges a Lot in the Village of the Prairie du Pont, one Hundred and Fifty Feet square—joining Thomas Winn, Charles Gill and the Common.— Francois Trottier,*1 the Son a Piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of half an Arpent from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining Clement Trot- tier and Louis Le Brun.— Auguste Trottier the son A Piece of Land of half an An Arpent at the Bois Coupé from the River to the Hills joining Henry Biron and Clement Trottier.— Joseph Trottier the Son—a Piece of Land of half an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills at the Bois Coupé joining Paul Poupart and the Land occupied by the Priests— Joseph Trottier A Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont of half an Arpent in Breadth, from the Mississippi to the Hills joining Clement Trottier and Jean Baptist des Hayes.— Joseph Poupart a Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Cabassier and Ardouin.— Joseph Poupart A Piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Baptist Saucier and Trottier.— Clement Trottier—N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of the Breadth of half an Arpent, from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining Augustin Trottier and Francois Trottier the Son—N° 2 another Piece at the Prairie du pont of half an Arpent from the River to the Hills, Joining Jean Baptist des Hayes,62 and Joseph Trottier. Francois Trottier the Elder a piece of Land of two Arpents in Breadth at the Bois Coupé from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining La Chanssee and Joseph Poupart.— * Bazile Leboeuf, ibid., p. 629. * Unidentified. 81 The Trottier family at Cahokia belonged to the mercantile and official class; for an account of, see Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 624. ■ Deshayes dit St. Cyr, ibid., p. 624.
Page 272
272 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Jean Baptist Cabassier a Lot at the Prairie du pont of one Hundred and Fifty Feet Square lying in front upon the Great Street, the Com- mon behind, and Joining Antoin la Cource— Joseph La Pense N° 1 a Piece of Land at the Prairie du Pont from the River to the Hills between Garsin and Louis Trottier N° 2 an other piece in the same Prairie of an Arpent in Breadth, joining des Hayes and Pillet— Jean Baptist Mercier N° 1 a Lot behind the Village of Cahokia joining the Road that leads to Fort Charters on one side, on the other to a Cross Street—N° 2—a Piece of Land from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining the Widow Buet and Sans facon, of an Arpent and an half in Breadth—N° 3 another Piece of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining the Widow Ferit and le Comte Jean Baptist des Hayes N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie du pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the Hills to the Rigoulet joining Clement Trottier and Joseph des Loges—N° 2 another Piece of Land in the same Prairie of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Joseph la Chanssee and Louis Trottier.—N° 3 another Piece at the Brise Culotte, from the River to the Hills joining Joseph Pepin called la Chanssee and Louis Trottier.— The Widow of Gabriel Baron a Piece of Land at the Brise Culotte of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Louis Le Comte, and Antoine Harmand— Antoine Harmand A Piece of Land in the Prairie of the Gross Liard of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills Joining Charles la Croire63 and Paul Poupart.— Charles Buteau a Piece of Land at the Prairie of the Gros Liard of an arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining Joseph Buleard and the Widow of La Page.— Antoine La Cource64 N° 1 a Lot in the Villiage of the Prairie du Pont of three Hundred feet Long and one Hundred and fifty Broad, joining Baptist Cabassier and Francois Cabassier. N° 2 a Piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills, joining Clement Alary and Louis le Brun.—N° 3 another Piece at the Cul de Sac of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Baptiste Chartran and Jean la Pense— Phillip Engall a Lot in the Prairie du pont of one Hundred and Fifty feet Broad, and three Hundred feet long, before it a Street that runs along the Rigoulet, behind another Street which seperates it from Joseph des Logis, Mr Gerardin on the North West, and a Street on the South East.— Piere Martin a Lot in the Prairie du Pont Village whereon he lives one Hundred and Fifty Feet Square.— 43 La Croix. u Lacource.
Page 273
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 273 Piere Martin N° 1 a piece of Land in the Prairie du Pont, of an Arpent in Breadth at the Cul de Sac, joining the Widow Turgeon & the Widow of George Blain.—N° 2 another Piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills joining Widow Beaulieu & Jean Marie Dorcon.— Henry Biron N° 1 a Piece of Land of an Arpent and Three Quar- ters in Breadth, from the River to the Hills, joining Louis Gaud and Louis Le Comte in the Prairie of the gros Liard.—N° 2 another Piece in the same Prairie of half an Arpent joining Louis Chatel and Louis le Comte.— Henry Biron a Piece of Land of an Arpent and an half at the Bois Coup6 from the River to the Hills joining La Flamme and Francois la Pense— Piere Chretien a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth at the Bois Coupe\ from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining Jean Marie Dorion, and Bazile la Flamme.— Louis Joseph La Buissere a Piece of Land of two Arpents in Breadth from the River to the Hills, in the Prairie of Brise Culotte joining Pier La Fleur—Jacques Millot.— Benjamin Clermont—a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth from the River to the Hills in the Prairie du Pont joining Louis Pillet and Joseph Biquier.— Jean Baptiste Cardinal*6 a Piece of Land at the Place call'd Paiisa four Arpents in Front and Forty in Depth, fronting upon the Mis- sissippi and having Vacant Land on the other three sides.— Joseph Pepin dit la Chansse N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of the gros Liard of an Arpent in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining Bredy and the Priests Lands.—N° 2 another Piece of half an Arpent at the Bois Coupé from the Rigoulet to the Hills join- ing Louis Coste and Francois Trottier.—N° 3 another Piece of one Arpent, at the Brise Culotte from the River to the Hills, joining Louis Trottier, and Jean Baptiste des Hayes.— Piere La Perche N° 1 a Piece of Land in the Prairie of Cahokia of two arpents in Breadth from the Rigoulett to the Hills joining Louis Pilet and Francois Saucier.—N° 2 an other Piece at the Bois Coupe of an Arpent an Arpent and an half in Breadth from the Rigoulet to the Hills, joining Francois la Pense and Auguste Trottier.— Piere La Perche a Piece of Land at the Bois Coupé of an Arpent in Breadth, from the River to the Hills, joining Jean Baptiste la Becasse and Jean Baptiste Mercier.— Louis Relle a Piece of Land of an Arpent in Breadth in the Prairie of the the Gros Liard from the Rigoulet to the Hills joining Dorion and Louis Gaud.— 65 From Vincennes; A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 11. 1266S0—34—19
Page 274
274 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The following Locations being for seperate and distinct Tracts of Land, Care must be taken in laying them out, that the adjoining Lands may not be injured.—that is to say, they are to be laid out in such a figure and Proportion as to length and Breadth as that the Lands on both sides may be accommodated with a due Portion of Wood Land and Prairie, as well as the pieces that have been settled upon.— Nathaniel Hull a Tract of Land of four Hundred English Acres about six miles north of the Little Village of Sl Phillippe, being the place whereon he now lives— Catharine Moore the Widow of James Moore. for herself and his Children.—A Tract of Land at the Belle fountain being that whereon James Moore deceased was Esablished, to contain four Hundred Acres. The Widow of Jacob Grout for her self and his Heirs.—a Tract of Land of one Hundred Acres purchased of Paul Poupart whereon he had a sugar work— Francis Bellew and his son Timothy as joint Tennants.—a Piece of Land lying between James Piggots Land and that of Mr Watts.— Nicholas Smith a Tract of Land of four hundred Acres on the River Crouche near the Grand Ruisseau whereon he was settled and had made considerable improvements, joining Lands occupied by Jacob Grout and John Demsy. James Piggot a Piece of Land of four Hundred Acres on the Grand Ruisseau, to Join Jacob Grout on one side and Vacant Lands on the other, being the Place Whereon he is settled.— William Dove, at the Request of Alexander Dennis By Power of Attorney from Dove.—A Tract of Land in the Mississippi Bottom of Four Hundred Acres, settled by him in 1782. & being the same whereon Henry Golding lived.— John Dimpsey"* a Tract of Land of four hundred Acres about one Mile and a Half North of the Belle fountain being the place he built upon.— William Piggot—a Tract of Land upon the Grand Ruisseau joining James Piggot and Lands Claimed by Benjamin Rogers.— John Moore a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres, about three Miles North of the Bell fountain, the improvement made for him by his Father.— Drusilla Andri a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres whereon an improvement was made by her father, before he and the rest of the Family Were killed, upon the waters of the Belle Fountain. The following are applications for Lands by Persons claiming as settlers under the State of Virginia: if the settlements were made on » Dempsey.
Page 275
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 275 or before the year 1783 they will be entittled to Four Hundred Acres each, but before any Survey is made Proof must be given of the settle- ments, by an examination of disinterested Persons—upon Oath: which Proof you are hereby empowered and required to take, and you are to observe Particulerly that it is usual to speak of improvements which very often means nothing more then the marking or circling of a few Trees, a kind of improvement by which if it was allowed, a single man could possess himself of several Tracts in the course of one day; to such no attention is to be Paid unless it should clearly appear that they were made before the Year 1783, and with the bona- fide intention of settlements which might have been prevented by the Savages, and that under such improvement as it is called, no more then one Place is claimed by an Individual. Shadrach Bond A Piece of Land near the Eagle Lake said to have been improved by Elisha Vanelson in the Mississippi Bottom joining Benjamin Biron containing about two Hundred Acres.— James Bryan a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres on the Belle fountain Creek bounded by the Creek one side and the Eagle Prairie on the other.— David Guise a Tract of Land in the Mississippi Bottom between the Rocks and the Mississippi Lake about a Mile and an half below the Eagle Lake, said to have been settled in 1781.— Peter Zipp a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres, on the West side of the Eagle Lake and Bounded by that Lake and the Belle fountain Creek—said to have been improved in 1781.— George Ware a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres about one mile above the Mouth of the Belle Fountain Creek having the Creek upon the West side Laton White a Tract of Land in the Prairie of Tamarois of four Hundred Acres said to have been improv'd in the Year 1779.— Larkin Rutherford a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres joining the Tamarois Prairie said to have been improved in 1783 and he a Resident since 1781.— George Hendricks a Tract of Land in the Prairie Tamarois said to have been improved 1783—and he a Resident since 1780 Catherine Ryan a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres in the Mississippi Bottom three Miles from the Eagle Lake and by the Mis- sissippi Lake and the Rocks.— Josiah Ryan a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres joining Cath- erine Ryan on the S. E. Side.— Josiah Ryan a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres, settled by Henry Golden, and bequeathed to him by Golden Ebenezer Severns A Tract of Land on the East side of the Prairie of Tamarois improved as it is said in 1783—
Page 276
276 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Robert Crighton a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres at the low end of the Prairie towards the Eagle which is at the Very Bottom of it, said to have been improved in 1782. The Widow of Jacob Grout for herself and his Heirs.—a Piece of Land at the Grand Ruisseau of Four Hundred Acres said to have been settled in 1783 Alexander Dennis Four Hundred Acres of Land lying East of and adjoining to Lands of Venerst, said to have been improved by Charles Gill in 1782 and sold by Gill to Dennis.— The Heirs of James Garritson deceased, a Tract of Land near the Bell Fountain and to include the Lot improved by their Father, of Four Hundred Acres joining James Moor's Land, said to have been improved in 1782.— Isaac West, a Tract of Four Hundred Acres near the Kasskaskias Road, purchased by him of Thomas Winn—and said to have been settled in 1783— John Sullivan a Tract of Land in the Prairie of the Bell Fountain of Four Hundred Acres.— Joseph la Couture a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres at the Marais de Bute joining L'ambert.— Joseph L'ambert a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres at the Sugar Loaf, said to have been settled many Years ago.— Latton White Four Hundred Acres of Land on the Kaskaskias Road, about two Leagues from the Bell Fountain purchased of Daniel Hen- ery in 1783— Charles Gill a Tract of Land of Four Hundred Acres at a Place called the sandy Prairie in the Mississippi Bottom, said to have been improved in the Year 1780. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE INHABITANTS OF PRAIRIE DU ROCHER [SF:1 Cong., 3 sess.:C 87] Kaskaskia' June 5th 1790. By the Governor Mr Beard,68 the Surveyor appointed to survey the lands held by the inhabitants at the Prairie du Rocher, having executed that business as far as claimants appeared, is to be paid for his services at the rate of two dollars and a half per mile, reckoning upon one line in the length of each survey, and two dollars for each Lot in the Village. 87 This document was enclosure no. 6 in the Secretary of State's report, Feb. 17, 1791 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 18-22), and enclosure no. 5 in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 324. A map accompanied the document, which is found in the Senate files, attached to the Secretary's report of Feb. 17. 88 Samuel Baird.
Page 277
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 277 When that expence is defrayed, new concessions will be made out for the proprietors as soon as possible (signed) Arthur St Clair. TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE PRAIRIE DU ROCHER. ORDERS FOR ERECTING PRISONS AT KASKASKIA [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, I-A:C »•] N° 16. [June 6, 1790] Par le Gouverneur Comme il ny a rien de plus necessaire pour le bonheur de la societé que l'administration convenable de la justice le prevention des crimes ou leur punition dans les cas où il est impossible de les prevenir, et que les bons cetoyens soient protigé dans leur vie, et leur proprieté; biens cependant qu'on ne peut pas espere si les officiers de la justice ne sont pas soutenu et fourni de toutes choses necessaires pour l'execution de les loix, et pour porté les sentences et decrets judiciaires de les majis- trats en plein effet: Et comme un prison est un de les moyens indis- pensable a ces fins les habitans du district de Kaskaskia sont enjoigne de s'en pourvoir aussi tot que possible. Et comme un emplacement dans le voisinage de l'eglise est assigne pour le besoins publiques, ils sont commande de le faire battir le dit prison, sur tel part de le dit emplacement, et en telle forme que les juges au paix de la village de Kaskaskia, ou trois des eux jugeront le plus apropos. Donne au Kaskaskia le six de Juin 1790.70— [Translation] By the Governor As there is nothing more necessary for the happiness of society than the proper administration of justice, the prevention of crimes or the punishment thereof in cases where it is impossible to prevent them, and that good citizens be protected in their lives, and their property; advantages which cannot be hoped for if the officers of justice are not supported and furnished with everything necessary for the enforce- ment of the laws, and in order to put judicial sentences and decrees of magistrates into full effect: and as a prison is one of the indispensable means to such end, the inhabitants of the district of Kaskaskia are enjoined to provide themselves therewith as soon as possible. And as a site in the vicinity of the church is assigned to the public needs, they are commanded to have the said prison built on such part of the said site, and in such form as the justices of the peace of the village of Kaskaskia, or three of them shall deem to be the most appropriate. Done at Kaskaskia, June 6, 1790. « Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 334. 70 See Journal Exec. Procs., under same date, post, in, 308.
Page 278
278 TERRITORIAL PAPERS REPRESENTATIONS OF PRAIRIE DU ROCHER TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, I-A:C n] N° 8 [June 7, 1790] Nous soussignes habitans du district, de La Prairie du Rocher. Prions Messieurs Jean Baptiste Barbau pere, et Antoine de Louviere é Cuyers, de faire de tres humbles representations à son Excellence Arthur St Clair Gouverneur des Etats ouest, de La Belle Riviere; à Ce qui'l Luy plaise Jetter un œil de compassion sur La misere qui desole ce district, quy les mets presque touts, hors d'etat de payer les fraix d'arpentage, que La Congres, à ordonne de faire dans ce pais, à moins de faire abandon de leurs terre. priant les dits sieurs barbau et louviere de ce conduire, suivant les instructions, que nous leurs avons donné, et ils obligeronts leurs tres humbles et tres obeissants serviteur et concitoyens, à la Prairie du Rocher le 7 Juin 1790. Ge Decochy.73 pour marque de pour marque de Francois X Thibault 79 Joseph X louchons,74 Francois X Carnus80 pour marque de pour marque de Baptiste X Des Gaiez 75 Pier X De gaie 81 pour marque de Baptis Janis 82 Jaque X Boutilieté 79 pour marque de pour marque de Jacques X Perier83 Jaque X Des gaie 77 pour marque de pour marque de Joseph X Blais 84 Louis X Lasoude 78 pour marque de Antoine X Cotinos 85 » Enclosed in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 326. Neither the origi- nal document nor the copy submitted by the Governor has been discovered. The copy from which this text has been taken is a contemporary one found in a volume of copies; it is very unsatisfactory, especially with reference to the names of sub- scribers, many of which it is impossible to identify, although there are available fairly complete lists of the inhabitants of Prairie du Rocher. » Gabriel De Cochy; see Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 420. » Unidentified. ™ Jean Baptiste De Gagnier; see Alvord (ed.), op. cit., p. 420. Jacque Bouteillet; see Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 203. "Jacques De Gagnier. » See Alvord (ed.), op. cit., p. 368. 78 François Thibault; see Mason (ed.), op. cit., p. 222. K Unidentified. 91 Pierre de Gagnier; see Alvord (ed.), op. cit., p. 420. ° Jean Baptiste Janis, ibid., p. 420. ■ Jacques Perrier or Perrien, ibid., p. 419. * Joseph Blay; see Mason (ed.), op. cit., p. 203. M Antoine Cottinault; see Alvord (ed.), op. cit., p. 420.
Page 279
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 279 pour marque de antoine x dosmaingb88 Gerard Langlois87 Ayme Comt 88 pour marque de Baptiste X Cotie 89 Barbau fils.90 [Translation] [June 7, 1790] We the undersigned inhabitants of the district of La Prairie du Rocher beg Messrs. Jean Baptiste Barbau, senior, and Antoine de Louviere é Cuyers to make very humble representations to His Excel- lency Arthur St. Clair, Governor of the states west of La Belle Riviere; to the end that he may see fit to cast an eye of compassion on the dis- tress which is desolating this district, which prevents nearly all of them from paying the costs of the surveying, which Congress has ordered done in that country, without abandoning their land. We beg the said Messrs. Barbau and Louviere to act according to the instructions that we have given them, whereby they will oblige their very humble and very obedient servants and fellow citizens, at La Prairie du Rocher, June 7, 1790. MEMORIAL OF FATHER GIBAULT AND OTHERS TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SF:1 Cong., 3 sess.:C»] To his Excellency Arthur S1 Clair EsqT Governor and Commander in Chief of the Territory of the United States North West of the River Ohio. The Memorial of the Inhabitants of Kaskaskia, la Prairie du Rocher and Cahokia, County of St Clair. Humbly sheweth That by an Act of the Congress of 20th June 1788,92 it was declared that the lands theretofore possessed by the said inhabitants should 88 Antoine Domingue; see Mason (ed.), op. ext., p. 203. 87 hoc. ext. 88 Aym6 Comte, jr.; see Alvord (ed.), op. eit., p. 419. 88 Baptiste Cottinault (Cotino), ibid., p. 420. M Jean Baptiste Barbau, jr., ibid., p. 419. "This document was enclosure no. 7 in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1791 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 18-22), and enclosure no. 6 in St. Clair's report, Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 324. The above document, which is also printed in A.S.P., op. eit., p. 21, and in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, tl, 148-149, is a copy and bears only the first name and the number of signers. The original, with the names of the signers, has not been found. There is another contemporary copy in the Jefferson Papers (LC). The subscribers' names to the present list have been supplied from a contemporary copy in SD Archives (Terr. Papers), which was carelessly made by a copyist unfamiliar with the French spelling. An attempt has been made to identify the names from available contemporary lists of inhabitants, which are fairly complete and accurate. n Ante, p. 112. (N° 6) Translation [June 9,1790]
Page 280
280 TERRITORIAL PAPERS be surveyed at their expense, and that this clause appears to them neither necessary nor adapted to quiet the minds of the people. It does not appear necessary, because from the establishment of the Colony to this day, they have enjoyed their property and possessions without disputes or law suits on the subject of their limits; that the surveys of them were made at the time the concessions were obtained from their ancient Kings, Lords, or Commandants; and that each of them knew what belonged to him, without attempting an encroach- ment on his neighbour, or fearing that his neighbour would encroach on him. It does not appear adapted to pacify them, because instead of assuring to them the peaceable possession of their ancient inherit- ances, as they have enjoyed it till now, that clause obliges them to bear expences, which in their present situation, they are absolutely incapable of paying, and for the failure of which they must be deprived of their lands. Your Excellency is an Eye witness of the poverty to which the inhab- itants are reduced, and of the total want of provisions to subsist on. Not knowing where to find a morsel of bread to nourish their families, by what means can they support the expence of a survey which has not been sought for on their parts, and for which it is conceived by them there is no necessity? Loaded with misery and groaning under the weight of misfortunes, accumulated since the Virginia Troops entered their Country, the unhappy inhabitants throw themselves under the protection of your Excellency, and take the liberty to solicit you to lay their deplorable situation before Congress. And as it may be in- teresting for the united States to know exactly the extent and limits of their ancient possessions, in order to ascertain the lands which are yet at the disposal of Congress, it appears to them, in their humble opinion, that the expence of survey ought more properly to be borne by Congress for whom alone it is useful, than by them who do not feel the necessity of it. Besides this is no object for the united States; but it is great, too great for a few unhappy beings who your Excellency sees yourself are scarcely able to support their pitiful existence. To these motives they venture to add that of the generosity worthy of a great people: the taking upon them a burthen too heavy for a small number of unhappy individuals will give lustre to their dignity. They venture to hope that the paternal goodness of your Excellency towards your adopted Children will induce you to present their humble supplication to the honorable Congress, and that you will second it with your protection.93 They will ever pray to heaven for the preservation and prosperity of your Excellency.94 County of Sl Clair June 9th 1790 93 See act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339. M This was the copy sent to Congress, and bears only the first name, and in
Page 281
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 281 P: Gibault. ptre.95 J" Dumoulin Clemand X Trotia 96 Augustrotie 97 Louis Lebrun Veuve Beaulieu Michele Beaulieux Pierre La 98 Henry Biron 99 Charles X Codron 1 P: Billett.2 Barbau. Francois Janis. Antoine X Bienvenu Jn Baptiste X Gendron. Baptis Janis. B: Tardiveau. Bte Dubuyus3 Nicholas X Boismanu4 Philipe Gervais Joseph Cuire 6 At: Girardin. Philipe Engel. Pierre Cabolier 6 Joseph Lambert M. Ducharme Barbau fils.7 Louis X Relle Pierre X Butaux.8 pour marque Louis X Labonde. Joseph X Blais9 Francois X Tibot 10 Joseph X [Thibault] Pier des Gaiez 11 Jacque Degaiez.12 Baptiste Cot 13 Joseph X 14 Francois X 15 Charle X Germin 16 Joseph X B 17 Rene X Beauvet. Etiene X Artoin.1' Joseph X Bettie19 parenthesis "and 87 others"; the other names have been supplied from a French copy in SD Archives (Terr. Papers). The Jefferson copy contains the following endorsement: "February 17th 1791 Recorded & examd". ,6 Appointed vicar-general of Illinois by the Bishop of Quebec in 1768 (Alvord and Carter, eds., Trade and Politics, 1HC, xvi, 296). 9« Clement Trottier; see Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls. IV, 216, 226. 87 August Trottier, loc. cit. 28 Name evidently not completed by the contemporary copyist; probably either Pierre La Coste or Pierre Lafleur. M A justice of the peace in Cahokia, 1788-1790 (Alvord, ed., Cahokia Recs., IHC, II, 628). 1 Unidentified. 2 Pierre Billet dit Beausoleil. » J. Baptiste Dubuque; for sketch of whom see Alvord (ed.), op. cit., p. 629. 4 Boismenu, ibid., p. 628. s Creilly, of Kaskaskia; id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, v), 414. 8 Cabassier; id., Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 631. 7 Jean Baptiste Barbau, jr., of Prairie du Rocher; id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, v), 419. 8 Buteau; see Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colts., IV, 220. I Blay, of Prairie du Rocher; see Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, v), 420. 10 Francois Thibault, of Prairie du Rocher, ibid., p. 419. II Pierre De Gagnier, ibid., p. 420. 12 Jacques De Gagnier, loc. cit. 13 Cottinault (Cotino), loc. cit. 14 Unidentified. 15 Unidentified. 18 Charles Germain; Alvord, Cahokia Recs. (IHC, n), 630. 17 Unidentified. 18 Etienne Hardouin; Alvord, Cahokia Recs. (IHC, n), 630. le Unidentified.
Page 282
282 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Louis X Bergeront21 Marin X Panerase 22 Louis X Vade 23 Badiste X Capatie 24 Badiste X Mersie 25 Aman X Tellie 29 Louis X Grole 27 Badiste X Chartran 28 Pierre X Git29 August X Girardin Tomas X Ving 30 Charle X Gill Francois X Capatie 32 J. Baptis X Montreuil33 Etien X Page 84 Glode X Lemieu 35 Josephe X Tibot36 Baptis X Tomur 37 Louis X Laderoute 38 Jerome X Dani39 Michel X Dani40 Baptis X Cretis 41 Baptis X Laderout42 Jaque X Devegnes.43 Loran X Amelin31 F. BOSSERON AND OTHERS TO ACTING GOVERNOR To the Honorable Winthrop Sargent Esquire Secretary in and for the Territory of the United States North West of the River Ohio, and vested with all the Powers of Governor and Commander in Chief— Snt As you have given verbal orders to the Magistrates who for- merly composed the Court of the District of Post Vincennes under the Jurisdiction of the State of Virginia, to give you their Reasons for 31 Louis Bergeron; see Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 218, 225. 33 Marrain Pancrasse, ibid., p. 228. "Probably Louis Levasseur, of Prairie du Rocher; see Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 420. * Unidentified. "J. Baptiste Mercier; Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 626. »« Armant Tellier, ibid., p. 209. »» Louis Grosle, ibid., p. 359. 39 Baptiste Chartran, t6td., p. 287. M Possibly Pierre Gatient, of Cahokia, ibid., p. 67. "Possibly Thomas Winn; id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 422. M Laurent Hamelin; id., Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 247. 33 Unidentified. "J. Baptiste Montureuil of Kaskaskia; Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 418. 34 Etienne Page, ibid., p. 417. 35 Claude Lemieux, ibid., p. 442. »• Joseph Tibault, ibid., p. 419. 37 J. Baptiste Tomur dit Lasource, ibid., p. 415. '» Louis Laderoute dit Seguin, ibid., p. 51. "Jerome Danis, ibid., p. 414. 40 Michel Danis, loc. cit. 41 Possibly J. Baptiste Creilly, of Kaskaskia, loc. cit. 43 Jean Baptiste Laderoute dit Seguin; ibid., p. 416. 43 Jacques Devignais, of Kaskaskia, ibid., p. 414. «• Enclosed in Sargent to the President, July 31,1790, Journal Exec. Procs. post, ill, 323. SARGENT «* [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I:C] N°9. [July 3, 1790]
Page 283
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 283 having taken upon them to grant Concessions for Lands within the District, We beg leave in obedience thereto to inform you that their principal Reason is, That since the Establishment of this Country, the Commondants have always appeared to be vested with the powers to give Lands. Their Founder Mr Vincennes began to give Conces- sions, and all his Successors have given Lands and Lots. Mr Legras was appointed Commandant of Post Vincennes by the Lieutenant of the County and Commander in Chief John Todd, who was in the Year 1779 sent by the State of Virginia for to regulate the Government of the Country, and who substituted Mr Legras with his Powers; In his Absence Mr Legras who was then Commandant, affirmed that he had in Quality of Commandant Authority to give Lands, according to the antient Usages of other Commanders, and he verbally informed the Court of Post Vincennes that when they would judge it proper to give Lands or Lots to those who should come into the Country to settle or otherwise, they might do it and that he gave them permission so to do—These are the Reasons that we acted upon; and if we have done more than we ought, it was on Account of the little Knowledge which we had of public Affairs44—We are with the greatest Respect—Your Honors Most Obedient and very humble Servants F:Bosseron46 L: E: Deline Pierre Gamelin 48 Pierre X Querez Post Vincennes 3rd July 1790 Marque GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO SECRETARY SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers: C «] Fort Steuben,48 July 6th, 1790 Dear Sir:—I have been favoured with your letters48 by Major Wyllis who arrived at this place one day before me. Our journey was well enough this far, tho' not so expeditious as I had expected, and wished extremely.60 The delays I have met with since have been 44 See letter of July 6, infra. 48 Maj. Francois Bosseron. For his activities in connection with the American occupation, see James (ed.), G. R. Clark Papers (IHC, VIII, xix), index. 41 Appointed Judge of Court of Common Pleas, Indiana Territory, Aug. 3,1801; see "Exec. Journal, Ind. Terr.", Ind. Hist. Soc. Pubs., in, 103. 47 From a typed copy. ** Site of Jeffersonville, Indiana. A fort which was erected at the site of Steu- benville, Ohio, in 1789, was also called Fort Steuben. 49 Not found. M St. Clair left KaskasWa June 11 (Journal Exec. Procs., June 11, post, in, 313) to return to Marietta, leaving to Sargent the duty of proceeding to Vincennes to carry into execution at that place the instructions of Aug. 29, 1788, ante, p. 146. See St. Clair's letter of instructions, June 10, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 811.
Page 284
284' TERRITORIAL PAPERS intolerable. At last, however, we get off and the big boat is left for you. As yet she is not got over the Falls, the water being in an unfavorable state, both too. high and too low. I have directed Mr. Buntin 52 to forward the Indian things, but I fear they cannot reach you in time. It was, however, impossible to send them from the mouth of the Ouabash as had been proposed, as there was no boat there, and it would have been attended with some difficulties if there had been one there. The instructions to Mr. Todd which you desire a copy of I cannot come at, but they are silent on the subject of the lands,53 and the act of assembly was to continue in force for one year only—whether it expired by its own limitations or was re-enacted, I know not.64 Mr. Todd was appointed the County Lieutenant and empowered to make the necessary appointments, civil and military, and those were, all his powers. The grants that have been made by him, and by the courts appear to me to have been altogether unauthorized, and I have uni- formly rejected all the concessions made by the courts.65 I should have been happy to have met with the judges, but as they are with you and you know perfectly the regulations that are wanted, I hope no delay in providing them will arise from our missing each other. I beg the favour that you will present my compliments and I shall write to them by the first opportunity from Fort Washington—to Mr. Baird,50 also, if you please; and to Major Hamtramck. It is impos- sible for me to write here at this time having been more plagued and vexed than ever I was in the same time in my life, and delayed almost a week when the utmost expedition was necessary. I wish you health and a safe return, and am, dear Sir, Your Most Obedient Servant, A. St. Clair The Honorable Winthrop Sargent, Esq., Secretary of the West- ern Territory, Post St. Vincennes. 52 Robert Buntin, an early American settler at Vincennes, was a surveyor and for a long period clerk of the courts of Knox County, Northwest Territory, and Indiana Territory (Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, II, 411-412; Ind. Hist. Soc. Pubs. Ill, 122). 53 By Governor Henry, of Virginia, Dec. 12, 1778, Cal. Va. State Papers, I, 312-314; Mason (ed.), Chicago Hist. Colls., IV, 289. "Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), x, 552; Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 9-11. In May, 1780, the act was continued for one year. This meant that the statutory organization of the County of Illinois came to an end in 1781. 55 See memorial of Feb. 28, 1788, ante, p. 92. 59 Samuel Baird, surveyor.
Page 285
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 285 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO SAMUEL BAIRD 57 [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:CM] [July 13, 1790] Warrants of Survey & Instructions to Samuel Baird Esquire— From the Land Records N° 1 for the Town of Vincennes & County of Knox—Winthrop Sargent Secy Town at Post Vincennes July the 13th 1790 59 To Samuel Baird Esq" Sir From the best Informations I have been able to acquire—Con- firmed by the Testimony of the Gentlemen of the Courts of Quarter Sessions of the Peace, & Common Pleas, as well as Judge of Probate— given me in the Presence of yourself, major Hamtramck & Major Vigo 60 I believe the following to be an accurate List of the Heads of Families settled at Post Vincennes on & before the year 1783, & Resi- dents here at this Time—Consequently they are entitled to the Dona- tion Lands promised them by Congress61—& you will please to con- sider this as your sufficient Warrant for surveying & Allotting them agreeably to the Commission given you for that Purpose— Patents will issue as soon as your Returns are made into my Office— Winthrop Sargent Joseph Andrez Antoinie Bordeleau Senr Louis Alare Louis Brouillet Francois Brouillet Louis Boyer Junr Vital Boucher John Baptiste Cardinal Francois Baroy Junr Francois Coder Marie The Widow of Pierre Cornieyer Louis Boyer Joseph Chabot John Baptiste Binette Antoine Caty Amable Baulon Francois Compagnot Charles Bonneau Jacque Cardinal Charles Bergand Joseph Chartier Michel Bordeleau John Charpentier Nicolaus Baillarjon Louis Coder Michel Brouillet Jacob Charbonneau Francois Bosseron Pierre Cartier Senr Francois Baroye Senr Moses Carter 57 Enclosed in a letter of Sargent to the President, July 31, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 323. 58 In the handwriting of Sargent. "Printed also in A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 11-12. « Francis Vigo; for sketch of, see Quaife (ed.), Askin Papers (BHR, I), 227. "Act of Aug. 29, 1788, printed ante, p. 145. See also Journal Exec. Procs., July 18, 1790, post, in, 322, and instructions to Baird, July 31, 1790, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 12-15. The latter contains a descriptive list of those entitled to dona- tion lands in Vincennes.
Page 286
286 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Antoine Drouette John Baptiste Dubois John Baptiste Duchesne Charles Dielle Charles Delisle Pierre Daigneau Antoine Danys Louis De Elaureier John Baptiste De Elaureier Honnorez Danys Charles Dudevoir Amable Delisle Jacque Denye Joseph Ducharme Bonnaventure Derogier Nicolaus Ditard Francois Derause Louis Edeline Joseph Flamelin John Baptiste Joyale Paul Gamelin Charles Guielle Tousaint Goder Antoine Gamelin Pierre Gamelin Amable Gaurguipis Alexis Astruse Gallionois Pierre Gilbert John Baptiste Harpin Joseph Hunot Senr Etienne Jacques Edward Johnston Jacque Latrimouille Francois Lognon Joseph Lognon Jacque Lacroix Pierre Laforest Antony Luneford Charles Languedoc Jacque Lamotte Andrez Languedoc Renez Langlois Joseph Levrond Louis Laderoute Francois Languedoc Louis La Marc John Baptiste Mangen Pierre Mallette Antonie Mallette Andrez Monplesir Louis Meteyer Francois Minie John Baptiste Milliet Nicolaus Mayot Francois Mallet Joseph Mitchel Antonie Marier Frederick Mahl Joseph Mallette John Baptiste Mois Michael Neau John Baptiste Ouilette Joseph Perodeau Guillaume Payes Pierre Perret Amable Perron Pierre Quenez Senr John Baptiste St Marie Racine Pierre Rengez Francois Racine Pierre et Andrez Racine Louis Ravalet Louis Roussiault Joseph Raux Joseph St Marie Joseph Sabolle John Baptiste S' Aubin Etienne St Marie Francois Turpin Francois Trudel Joseph Tougas John Baptiste Tougas Francois Vachette John Baptiste Vaudrye John Baptiste Vaudrye Junr Francois Vigo Alexander Vallez Antonie Vaudrye John Baptiste Vilray Nicholaus Chapard Angelic, the Widow of Ettienne Phillibert Mary Louis, Widow of Nicholaus Perrot Felicitie, Widow of Francois Pettier Louisa, Widow of Andre Pettier Angelic, Widow of Francois Basinet Marie, Widow of Nicolaus Cardinal Susanna, Widow of Pierre Coder
Page 287
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 287 Marian, Widow of Louis Denorgon Marie, Widow of Toussaints Denorgon Veronique Widow of Gilliome Daperon Francoise, Widow of Ambroise Dagenet Gennevieve Widow of Pierre Grimare Ann, Widow of Moses Henry Catarine, Widow of John Baptiste Lafontaine Maudelin, Widow of St Jean Lagarde Veronie, Widow of Gabriel Legrand Marie Louis, Widow of John Phillip Marie Legrass Louisa, Widow of Antoine Lefevre Caterine Widow of Amable Lardoise Maudelin, Widow of Joseph Stone Gennevieve, Wife of Joseph Labuissiere—The Husband deserted. Renez Godere dit Pannah Agate Widow of Amable Dumay GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO SECRETARY SARGENT [111. Hist. Lib.:ALS] Fort Washington July 15th, 1790 Dear Sir General Harmar has with me digested the plan of an expedition into the Indian Country and the Militia has of course been called for82—One branch of it will move from Post St Vincennes, but it will not be in that force that I could wish it. Some addition to it might possibly be made from the Militia of that place. I do not know what their numbers are, neither do I expect that this letter will find you there.—I wish you however to send orders to the officer in com- mand of them to join Major Hamtramack with so many as make his effective Force five hundred Men, which will not require above one hundred, in which I would hope there will be no difficulty.—I set out this day for the Country above to get on the Pennsylvania Quota, and shall pass to New York and back so as to be here by the time the Expe- dition moves when I hope to have the pleasure to meet you, and am with very great regard Dear Sir Your most obedient Servant Ar St. Clair "See instructions of the Secretary of War to Harmar, June 7 and Aug. 14,1790, Harmar Papers (2W268, 309), Wis. Hist. Soc.; St. Clair to the Secretary of War, Aug. 23, 1790, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 155-162. The original of the latter, an important letter, has not been found; reliance must therefore be placed in the Smith version. See also A.S.P.,Ind. Affairs, I,87-104; Harmar to Doughty, Aug. 15,1790, Harmar Papers (2W284), Wis. Hist. Soc.; Harmar to Hamtramck, Sept. 3, 1790, Memoirs Hist. Soc. Pa., VII, 459-460. Other letters relevant to Harmar's offensive operations are found among his papers, including the journal of his campaign, Sept. 8-Nov. 30, 1790 (2W340), Wis. Hist. Soc.
Page 288
288 TERRITORIAL PAPERS JOSEPH ST. MARIE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT 63 [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I: ALS] [July 22, 1790] To the honorable Winthrop Sargent Esquire Secretary in and for the terri- tory of the United States north west of the River ohio and vested with all the Powers of Governor and Commander in Chief &c. Joseph Sl Marie of St Vincennes in the County of Knox in the said Territory, begs Leave to acquaint your Honor that on the 23d Day of August 1788 he took the Liberty of addressing a Letter to John Fran- cis Hamtramck Esquire Major in the first United States Regiment, and Commandant at Post Vincennes, of which the following is a Copy.64 "Sir In pursuance to the antient Usage and Custom of this Coun- try I, in the month of november last applied for and obtained Leave of Absence on a trading Voyage: In Consequence of which and of my right as a freeman and Citizen of the United States of America, I loaded a Petty-Augur with several Goods and merchandizes to the Amount of five thousand nine hundred and forty one Livres and fifteen Sols in Peltry, Currency of this place, equal to one thousand nine hundred and Eighty Dollars and forty two ninetieths of a Dollar, and sent them under the Care and management of my Clerk Mr. Swimmer, with Directions to proceed down the Mississipi River and trade them off with the Indian nations living within the Bounds of the United States of America.—Mr Swimmer according set out and went down that River to a Place called the Chicasaw Lake, which is situate about ninety Leagues down from the River Ohio, About twenty Leagues higher than where the English Fort of the Arquancas 6t for- merly stood and in about 34° 40" of north Latitude according to Hutchins's map, where he pitched his Camp on the East or American Side of the Mississipi, in the neighbourhood of some friendly Indians who were there hunting. Here after a few Days Stay he was taken up by an order from Mr Valliere the Spanish Commandant at the Post of the Arquancas by a Party of Spanish Soldiers sent from that fort, who at the same time seized the Petty-Augur and the Goods, and carried them together with my Clerk and the other Hands in the Boat to the Spanish Fort, where Mr Valliere the Commandant seized and confiscated the property for the Use of the Spanish King, at the same time informing the men, that his orders from the Governor of Louisiana at New Orleans were express, to seize and confiscate all the u Enclosed in Sargent to the President, July 29, 1790, post, p. 294. 84 A copy of this letter is also found in SD Archives (Amer. Letters, vol. iv). It was enclosed in St. Clair to Jay, Dec. 13, 1788, ante, p. 170. u The Arkansas post, in the province of Louisiana, was never under English control.
Page 289
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 289 Property which might be found on the Mississipi or on either of its Shores, any where below the mouth of the Ohio, and to send the Per- sons of those with such Goods, Prisoners to him at New Orleans— Being very soon after informed of this Transaction I went to the Ar- quancas and applied to the Spanish Commandant for a Restoration of my Property, who in very peremptory terms refused giving them up alledging his before mentioned orders and adding that I might take it as a great favor that my Clerk and Hands as well as myself were not confined and sent in Irons to Orleans as Prisoners When I rea- soned on my Right as an American Subject to traffic in the American Dominions, and that my Property was seized in the Territory to which I conceived America had an undoubted Right, he stopped me short by informing me that the Country on both Sides of the River Missis- sipi as high up as the mouth of the River Ohio belonged to Spain, and that the whole of the Country on the East Side of the mississipi from the mouth of Ohio downwards was then under the Spanish Gouvern- ment. "Surprized at this Information and not being satisfied that the Governor had really given such orders, I went to New Orleans and about the Eleventh Day of May—last obtained an Audience of the Governor Don mera,M who as soon as informed of my Name, asked me in very haughty terms how I could have the Audacity to appear before him on the Subject of the Seizure of my Property; That altho' I was a Frenchman born, yet that I then was an American Subject, and that if he the Governor was to follow his orders from the Court of Spain, he would send me Prisoner to the Mines of Brazil and then concluded in a threatening manner with bidding me depart from thence, and be no more seen, which last orders I was glad to obey and withdraw myself as soon and as far as possible from such Despots without receiving any Satisfaction.—Thus circumstanced my only and last Resource is to the honorable the Congress of the United States of America, as Guardians of the Rights and Liberties of her Subjects, whose persons have been seized and Properties confiscated on her acknowledged Territory by an armed force, in pursuance to the orders of a foreign Prince.—From the time that the Name of an American has been known in this Country I have been a Subject of the United States; I have fought in Defence of that Country whose Subjects a Spanish Commandant is hardy enough to oppress. And I am now, unless Gouvernment interferes without any Remedy for a Loss which will reduce me with a Wife and a numerous Family to the utmost Distress. "I must beg of you Sir to make known my Case to Congress in such manner as you shall think proper, and as speedily as possible, as in me the Right of Sovereignty of America as well to a very exten- « Est6ban Mir6. 1264S0—34 20
Page 290
290 TERRITORIAL PAPERS sive Territory as to the Navigation of the Mississipi any where below the mouth of the Ohio has been invaded: My Cause is become a public Cause and will in its Consequences determine a grand national Ques- tion.—I dare hope and trust that as an antient Inhabitant of this Country, and as one of the first Subjects of America in it, I shall be thought worthy the Protection of Congress, and that they will adopt some means to give Satisfaction and Recompence for my Losses.67— To convince you and the World of the Justice of my Cause, I propose to make Oath before a Magistrate of the Truth of the whole of the Case as before stated, and shall whenever called upon produce proper Vouchers and Proofs to authenticate the same, I am Sir &c &c" This Letter was accompanied with the Oath proposed, and with the Invoice hereto annexed, and also with an Affidavit of Mr Wm McIntosh who is now on a Voyage testifying that he had seen and had read to him by Mr Valliere the Spanish Commandant of the Post of the Arquancas the original Letter or Orders from Don Mera Governor of Louisiana at New Orleans, directing the said Mr Valliere to seize and confiscate the Property of all those who should be found on the Mississipi or on either Shore thereof from the mouth of the Ohio downwards as the whole of that Country belonged to Spain.—These Letters and Papers major Hamtramck forwarded to General Harmar, who sent them to Congress— But as they were delivered that honor- able Body when their Dissolution was about taking place, and as the many public Affairs since the Adoption of the new Constitution have in a manner entirely engaged the Attention of the new Congress, he begs Leave to address himself to your Honor, as vested with the Governor and Commander in Chief's Power in this Country, begging you to lay his Case before Congress and to procure him such Redress, as his distressed Situation as well as that of his family requires.68— He also begs Permission to testify the Truth of what is hereinbefore set forth by his own oath, and he also profers to adduce other suffi- cient and satisfactory proofs thereof whenever thereto requested.— He begs Leave to subscribe himself your Honor's most obedient and very humble Servant Joseph Sl Marie Sl Vincennes 22d July 1790 On the 22d July 1790 personally appeared before us two of the Jus- tices of the Peace for the County of Knox, Joseph St Marie above named, who made oath on the holy Evangelists according to Law, that the above Statement of his Case is just and true—In Witness •7 St. Marie's petition to Hamtramck, Aug. 26, 1788, for compensation for loss of peltry cargo, amounting in estimated value to $1,980, is in Harmar Papers (1W455-461), Wis. Hist. Soc. •* Mcintosh's letter was sent to the War Office by General Harmar.
Page 291
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 291 whereof we have hereunto set our han[ds and] Seals the Day and year aforesaid. Paul Gamelin [L. s.] Antoine Game[lin] [L. s.] Post S% Vincennes 23d August 1788.69 Personally appeared before us the subscribers magistrates of the District of Post St Vincennes Joseph Sl Marie of the same place Merchant Trader, who made oath upon the Holy Evangelists of almighty God that the above state of his case is just and true: In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals the day and year above written. Jean bte. Miliet (signed) James Johnston Valentine Tho' Dalton ANTOINE GAMELIN70 AND OTHERS TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT 71 [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, l:C] [July 23, 1790] To the Honourable Winthrop Sargent. Esquire Secretary of the Terri- tory, North West of the River Ohio, and now vested with all the powers of the Governor and commander in chief thereof72— The citizens of the town of Vincennes approach you; Sir, to express as well their personal respect for your honour, as their full approba- tion of the measures you have been pleased to pursue, in regard to their government and the adjustment of their claims, as inhabitants of the territory over which you at present preside.— While we deem it a singular blessing to behold the principles of free government unfolding among us, we cherish the pleasing reflection, that our posterity will also have cause to rejoice at the political change now originating—A free and efficient government, wisely adminis- tered, and fostered under the protecting wings of an august Union of States, cannot fail to render the citizens of this wide extended Terri- tory securely happy in the possession of every public blessing.— We cannot take leave, Sir, without offering to your notice a tribute of gratitude and esteem, which every citizen of Vincennes conceives M This is the oath which accompanied the first copy submitted on Aug. 23,1788; it is in SD Archives (Amer. Letters, vol. IV). 70 Indian agent, trader, and notary public in the French and British periods at Vincennes. In 1790 he was sent by Harmar to the Wabash Indians to attempt a reconciliation, and the journal covering his experiences on this occasion is printed in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, i, 93-94. "The communication in which this was enclosed has not been determined. "See St. Clair to Sargent (letter of instructions), and Sargent's proclamation, both of June 10, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 310-311.
Page 292
292 TERRITORIAL PAPERS he owes to the merits of an officer who has long commanded at this post.—The unsettled situation of things for a series of years previous to this gentleman's arrival, tended in many instances to derange, and in others to suspend the operation of those municipal customs by which the citizens of this town were used to be governed.—They were in the habit of submitting the superintendence of their civil regulations to the officer who happened to command the troops posted among them.—Hence, in the course of the late war, and from the frequent change of masters, they laboured under heavy and various grievances. —But the just and humane attention paid by Major Hamtramck during his whole command, to the rights and feelings of every indi- vidual craving his interposition demands and will allways receive our warmest acknowledgments.— We beg you, Sir, to assure the supreme authority of the United States of our fidelity and attachment; and that our greatest ambition is, to deserve its fostering care, by acting the part of good citizens.— By order and on behalf of the Citizens of Vincennes— Antoine Gamelin. F: Bosseron, Juge Juge quarter Cession L: E: Deline, M.77 Paul Gamelin, Juge78 F: Vigo Pierre Gamelin, Juge74 Major des Milices Ja" Johnson, d°76 H: Van Der Burgh 78 Luke Decker, M,78 Major Militia— Vincennes July 23rd 1790 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO ANTOINE GAMELIN AND OTHERS74 [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, l:C] [July 23, 179080] Gentlemen Next to that Happiness which I derive from a Con- sciousness of endeavouring to merit the approbation of the soverign Authority of the United States by a faithful discharge of the important Trusts committed to me, Is the grateful Plaudit of the respectable Citizens of this Territory.—And be assured Gentlemen that I receive » See Journal Exec. Procs., July 3, 1790, post, in, 316. 77 Louis Edeline, Joe. ext. 78 Aug. 12, 1791, post, III, 356; appointed to investigate land titles in the Wabash country in 1797 and chosen member of the Legislative Council of the Territory in 1799 (Philbrick, ed., Laws Ind. Terr., IHC, xxi, ccxxxV). "The communication in which this was enclosed has not been determined. 80 This is the date bracketed by Parker in his Calendar; Dillon, Hist. Ind., p. 238, gives the date of July 25.
Page 293
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 293 it from the Town of Vincennes upon this occasion with singular Satisfaction.—In an Event so Very interesting and important to every Individual as is the Organization of civil Government I regret exceedingly that you have been deprived of the Wisdome of our Worthy Governour.—His extensive abilities and long Experience in the Honourable Walks of Public Life might have more perfectly estab- lished that System which promises to you and Posterity such great Political Blessings— It is certain Gentlemen that the Government of the United States is most congenial to the dignity of human Nature, and the best Possi- ble Palladium for the Lives and Property of Mankind— The Services of Major Hamtramck to the Public, and his humane attention to the Citizens while in Command here have been highly meritorious—And it is with great pleasure that I have Officially ex- pressed to him my full approbation thereof Your dutiful sentiments of Fidelity and Attachment to the General Government of the United States shall be faithfully transmitted to their August President.— With the warmest wishes for the Welfare and Prosperity of Vin- cennes I have the Honour to be Gentlemen Your most obedient Humble Servant Winthrop Sargent [Endorsed] Address from the Citizens of Post Vincennes to W. Sargent & Reply— JUDGE PUTNAM81 TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:ALS •»] New York July 24th 1790 Sir I left Muskingum the 2d instent; northing new in that quarter Sence Mr Morgan came on, except, that a number of Horses have ben Stolen & one man killed at Bellevill (a Virginia Settlement about three miles below the great Hockhocking) which appears to be a Misschief altogather unprovoked. Also about the 28th of last month a woman was taken neer the mouth of Buffaloe Creek, and was afterward mur- dered, but this business was prefaced by the white people Stealing a number of Horses from the the Indians & refuseing to deliver them up when demanded.— 91 Nominated by the President Mar. 30, confirmed by the Senate Mar. 31, 1790 (Senate, Exec. Journal, l, 42), and commissioned Apr. 7, ante, p. 241. 82 In this and in certain other letters of Putnam's which will be printed in suc- ceeding pages of this volume, we have examples of his untutored composition. In others, comprising the majority of his letters, the composition is freer from gram- matical error: they were written by clerical aides, and signed by Putnam.
Page 294
294 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Muskingum Settlements have lost many Horses, the last fall & this Sumer, Some Stollen by white people but more by the Indians, and their is Sufficient evidence that Some of the Dellawares and Wyndots who attended the Treaty at Fort Harmer, as well as the Shawona'es have ben concerned in the thieft—their is also good reason to beleve that Several belonging to the Dellaware & Wyndot Nations, have ben concerned in Murdering the people and plundering the boats, going down the ohio; the last Winter and Spring, & it is likewise Said, that a number of White men ware among that Gang of robbers. It Seems that they are possessed of Some boats or other Craft on the Sioto, in which they Issue out of that river into the ohio, and haveing obtained their booty retire again with Saifty—iwould not a Small De- tachment of Troops Stationed at the mouth of the Sioto in great measure, if not wholly, put a Stop to this kind of business, and at the Same time give confidence to the people in the new Settlements on the the ohio, which are commenceing betwen the Sioto and the Great Kenhawa— By letters recived at Muskingum from Mr Secretary Sargent, and also from Major Doughtys information: I learnt that Govenor St Clair was Still in the Illinois Country & would not, probably, return to Muskingum till october, & that Misieur" Syms & Turner, left the Miamis in the month of May to attend the Govenor—Under these circumstancs I concived it best to to return imedately for my family. I leve this on Monday morning, Shall, be in Town again the first or 2d week in September on my way to the Western world— I have the honour to be Sir with every posable Sentement of the most perfect esteam your Excellencys most obedient Humble Servent Rufus Putnam Thee President [Endorsed] Rufus Putnam Esqr July 241 1790 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I: ALS] Vincennes 29th July 1790 Sir Mr Joseph Sl Marie a Citizen of Vincennes of good Character, has made Representation to me of a Seizure upon his Property by an Officer of his Catholic Majesty, and within what is understood to be the Territory of the united States—which I beg Leave to lay before your Excellency83— ■ St. Marie to Sargent, July 22, 1790, ante, p. 288.
Page 295
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 295 with very great Respect I have the Honour to be your Excellency's most Humble & devoted Servant Winthrop Sargent The President of the United States. [Addressed] The President of the United States New York ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I: ALS] Vincennes, County of Knox August 1" 1790— Sir By the Conveyance for my Official Communications I beg Leave to represent,81 that the Act of the United States which authorises & directs the Secretary of their Western Territory to discharge (at certain Times) the Duties of the Governour85 has involved me in addi- tional Expenses, Which they have not as yet been pleased to provide for, And which my private Finances do not capacitate me to defray— It is to me Sir a most painful Task to make any Representations that may imply a pecuniary Request for myself—but situated as I am it becomes incumbent upon me. In the Office of the Secretary, Advances of Money have been made by me for Stationary, Printing, Public Seal &ca (and for some of those Articles have again become necessary) whilst all my Applications for a Reimbursement, to the Board of Treasury, have been passed by in Silence—To the Duties of this Office as pointed out & defined by the Ordinance for the Government of the Territory of July 1787—I found myself fully competent, but circumstanced as we now are, & divided into many Counties & Districts, all of which are to be furnished with Copies of the Laws, Proclamations & Ordinances of the Governour, the Writings have consequently become so multiplied that no one Person, tho' devoting his whole Time, can be adequate to performing them—And in Addition to all this Sir, I am informed by Governour St Clair that it is expected I should consider myself as Secretary to the Indian Commission—a Business which in the Western Territory will probably for a long Time demand much Attention. I will beg Leave Sir to observe upon this Matter that when Congress established the Offices of Governour & Secretary, the Superintendency of Indian Affairs was in a third Person—and that at the Time they were pleased to bestow this upon the Governour,88 they increased his Salary—May I not therefore Sir reasonably presume that some further Provision "By mistake the letter was not enclosed; it was transmitted to the President Dec. 13, 1790, post, p. 314. ■ Aug. 7, 1789, ante, p. 203. M Oct. 3, 1787, effective Aug. 12, 1788 (Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 785).
Page 296
296 TERRITORIAL PAPERS should also be made for my Office if, contrary to the original System, it is to comprehend & include the Records of Indian Business? for tho' I would not by any Means ask or expect a Sinecure from Government yet I assure myself that I may with Propriety request such a Salary as shall enable me to discharge my Duty with Fidelity, & Reputation to myself87— Upon all those Subjects generally, I believe Sir it is the Intention of Governour St Clair to express himself at this Time, if the Importance of more Public Concerns shall leave him Opportunity—but the Ex- penses which I must necessarily incur by his present Absence is a Matter that has arisen therefrom And probably may escape his At- tention—this Subject therefore as well as the Advances I have been necessitated to make I will beg Leave to lay before Congress by this Opportunity— Most respectfully asking that they would be pleased to order for me such Provision as they may deem meet— with every Sentiment of the highest Respect I have the Honour to be Sir your most obedient devoted Servant Winthrop Sargent The President of the United States. VIRGINIA MILITARY LAND WARRANTS [SD:Original Statutes88] [August 10, 1790] An Act to enable the Officers and Soldiers of the Virginia Line on Conti- nental establishment to obtain titles to certain Lands lying North West of the river Ohio, between the little Miami and Sciota.69 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Act of Congress of the seventeenth of July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight, relative to certain locations and surveys made by, or on Account of the Virginia troops on Continental Establishment upon lands between the little Miami and Sciota rivers, North West of the Ohio,90 be, and the same is hereby repealed. And Whereas the Agents for such of the troops of the State of Vir- ginia who served on the Continental establishment in the Army of the 87 See Sargent to the Secretary of War, July 12, 1792, post, p. 406, and to the President, Dec. 30, 1793, post, p. 463; petition of Sargent, December, 1790, post, p. 318. 88 Printed also, with numerous variations, in 1 Stat. 182-184. The original text is not sectioned. 8' See resolution of July 17,1788, ante, p. 134; committee report, Sept. 6,1788, ante, p. 155; report of House committee, July 31,1789, with accompanying docu- ments, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 5-7; act of June 9, 1794, 1 Stat. 394; act of May 13, 1800, 2 Stat. 80; Annals, 2 Cong., 2 sess., 1015 et seg. "Ante, p. 134.
Page 297
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 297 United States, during the late War, have reported to the Executive of the said State, that there is not a sufficiency of good land on the South easterly side of the river Ohio, [according to the Act of cession from the said State to the United States,]91 and within the limits assigned by the laws of the said State, to satisfy the said troops for the bounty lands due to them, in conformity to the said laws:92 to the intent therefore, that the difference between what has already been located for the said troops, on the South Easterly side of the said river, and the aggregate of what is due to the whole of the said troops, may be located on the North Westerly side of the said river, and between the Sciota and little Miami rivers, as stipulated by the said State,93 Be it further enacted, That the Secretary of the department of War, shall make return to the Executive of the State of Virginia of the names of such of the Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and privates of the line of the said State, who served in the Army of the United States on the Continental establishment during the late War, and who in con- formity to the laws of the said State, are entitled to bounty lands; and shall also in such return state the aggregate Amount in Acres due to the said line by the laws aforesaid.94 And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the said Agents to locate to and for the use of the said troops, between the rivers Sciota and little Miami, such a number of Acres of good land, as shall, together with the number already located between the said two rivers and the number already located on the South Easterly side of the river Ohio, be equal to the aggregate amount, so to be returned as aforesaid by the Secretary of the department of War.95 And be it further enacted, That the said Agents, as soon as may be after the locations, Surveys, and allotments are made and completed, shall enter in regular Order in a book to be by them provided for that "A Senate amendment. The brackets are editorial. n July 31, 1789, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 5-7. K See Virginia deed of cession, Mar. 1, 1784, ante, p. 8. M Transmitted by the Secretary of War, Sept. 15,1790, Cal. Va. State Papers, v, 208. * The question of prior right, as between a grant from the United States, and one under a military warrant, was determined in favor of the latter in the case of Doddridge r. Thompson (9 Wheaton, 469-483). Similarly, see Reynolds r. McArthur (2 Peters, 417-441). Whether the reservation was to be held perma- nently for military warrants was decided in the case of Jackson v. Clark (1 Peters, 628-639). No entry was valid, however, until the Indian title to a tract in ques- tion was extinguished, as determined in Doe ex dem. C. Chinn v. Darnell (4 McLean, 440). See also citations to Virginia deed of cession, Mar. 1, 1784, ante, p. 6. The process] of rescinding patents in the tract is touched upon in Hall (ed.), Opinions Atts. Gen., I, 300-301. There is a calendar of relevant judicial decisions concerning patents in the Virginia military district in Laws of the U.S. . . . upon . . . Public Land Titles (46 Cong., 3 sess., Ex. Doc. 47, pt. 2), I, lxi. See also W. T. Hutchinson, "Bounty Lands Amer. Rev. in Ohio", an unpublished monograph in the University of Chicago Library, which embodies a complete bibliography of the general subject of military land bounties.
Page 298
298 TERRITORIAL PAPERS purpose, the bounds of each location and survey between the said two rivers, annexing the name of the Officer, non-commissioned Officer, or private originally entitled to each; which entries being certified by the said Agents or the Majority of them, to be true entries, the book con- taining the same, shall be filed in the Office of the Secretary of State. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the President of the United States, to cause letters patent to be made out in such Words and form as he shall devise and direct, granting to such person so originally entitled to bounty lands, to his use, and to the use of his heirs or assigns, or his or their legal representative or representatives, his, her, or their heirs or assigns the lands designated in the said en- tries: 96 Provided always, That before the seal of the United States shall be affixed to such letters patent, the Secretary of the department of War shall have indorsed thereon that the grantee therein named, was originally entitled to such bounty lands, and that he has examined the bounds thereof with the book of entries filed in the Office of the Secretary of State, and finds the same truly inserted; and every such letters patent shall be countersigned by the Secretary of State, and a minute of the date thereof, and of the name of the grantee shall be entered of record in his Office in a book to be specially provided for the purpose. And be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, as soon as may be after the letters patent shall be so com- pleted and entered of record, to transmit the same to the Executive of the State of Virginia, to be by them delivered to each grantee; or in case of his death, or that the right of the grantees shall have been legally transferred before such delivery, then to his legal representative or representatives, or to one of them. And be it further enacted, That no fees shall be charged for such letters patent and record, to the grantees, their heirs or assigns, or to his or their legal representative or representatives. Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg Speaker of the House of Representatives John Adams, Vice-president of the United States, and President of the Senate Approved, August the tenth, 1790 G° Washington, President of the United States. I certify that this Act did originate in the House of Representatives. John Beckley, Clerk. "Military land warrants, by the laws of Virginia, were not considered as chat- tels. A husband did not have the sole disposition of such a warrant held in the right of his wife. See opinion of the Attorney General (Wirt) to the Secretary of the Treasury, Oct. 8, 1819, Hall (ed.), Opinions Atts. Gen., I, 311.
Page 299
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 299 THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Washington Papers :D] United States August 13th 1790 Sib, The Session of Congress having closed, and it being my inten- tion to go to Virginia as soon as the public business will permit; and wishing, during my absence from the seat of Government, to have my mind as free from public cares as circumstances will allow; I am desirous of having such matters as may, by Law or otherwise, require the Agency or sanction of the President of the United States, brought to view before my departure.—I therefore request that you will cause such business, within your department, as may be necessary to receive the aid or approbation of the President, submitted to me as soon as its nature will permit;—particularly Regulations for trade and intercourse with the Indian Tribes, agreeably to the Act."— And information & opinions on the following points? Whether any other, and what steps shall be taken with them to restrain their Hostilities? Whether the orders given, and measures adopted, are adequate to the Peace of the Western Frontiers?—If not, what further is to be done for this purpose?— Upon the expediency and policy of a proclamation forbidding encroachments upon the Territory of the Indians or treating with them contrary to the Law lately passed.— Instructions for the Governor of the Ceded Territory S° of the Ohio.—Where ought the Governor to reside?— What notice should be taken of the Insult offered to Major Doughty98— What steps should be taken with respect to his recommendation of a Post at the mouth of the Tennessee?99— Other measures than those pursued by the present contractors for supplying the Western Posts ought to be adopted, that the Troops in that Country may be more efficiently employed on sudden emergen- cies and the Posts better secured.— Have any orders been given concerning the condemned Soldiers?— I am Sir Yr most Obedt Servt G. W. The Secretary of War. [Endorsed] To The Secy of War Augt 13t 1790 97 July 22, 1790, 1 Stat. 137-138. "Referring to the mission to Muscle Shoals; see memorandum of the Secretary of War to the President, May 27, 1790, Washington Papers (LC). w Doughty to Knox, Apr. 17, 1790, Harmar Papers (2W218), Wis. Hist. Soc.
Page 300
300 TERRITORIAL PAPERS SECRETARY SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] Fort Steuben, Rapids of Ohio August 17th 1790 My Dear Sir I have been favoured with yours dated at this Post & Fort Washington 1 & have given Instructions to the command* Officer of Vincennes agreeably to your Desire. My Official Com- munications to the President of the United States which accompany this Letter will inform you of my Proceedings in the County of Knox 2— Although the Judges have been with me for a long Time past, & I was not ignorant that much remained for us to do, yet very little has been done, which as it respects myself I feel to be a great Misfortune & Unhappiness, but not a Fault8—Some Regulations which I conceived to be very necessary should have been made by my own Authority but from a well founded Apprehension that such Authority might be questioned in a Manner injurious to Government—Your Excellency, I understand has expected that a general Court would have been held at St Clair & Knox Counties, but I could not reconcile it to my Ideas of Delicacy to your Character to alter the Law upon that Head 4—and for which I would have adduced no better Reason than the private Accommodation of the Judges—Had it been otherwise they could not have proceeded, for no provision is as yet made by the Contractors for their Escort—and even major Hamtramck's Garrison will I am persuaded suffer for the Want of Bread. I have paid Gamelins Account (200 Dollars)6 & request you to make arrangements with Col Platt6 that it may be reimbursed to Major Jackson who advanced the money, or otherwise the Bill drawn upon the Occasion will be protested. I have been under the Necessity of borrowing Indian Goods from the Contractors Store at Vincennes & of Mr Vigo7 to make some Presents to the Ouiatanons, the Circumstances of whom you are ac- quainted with—Mr Bunting8 promises me to replace those Articles 1 July 15, 1790, ante, p. 287. » Journal Exec. Procs., July 31, 1790, post, III, 323 et seq. » See Sargent to Symmes and Turner, July 13, 1790, and Aug. 22 and 30, 1790, ibid., pp. 317, 329, 330. * The terms of the general court were fixed by the law of Aug. 30, 1788 (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvII, 11). 5 Referring to Antoine Gamelin's expenses in connection with his mission to the Wabash Indians, Apr. 5-May 5, 1790; see St. Clair to the Secretary of War, Sept. 19, 1790, post, p. 306. See also Sargent to Hamtramck, July 16, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, m, 320, and Gamelin's "Journal", printed in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 155-160. • Col. Richard Platt. 7 Francis Vigo. * Robert Buntin.
Page 301
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 301 by some Opportunity—& I hope my Conduct may meet your Excel- lency's Approbation. It is I assure you Sir with much Pleasure I have been informed of your safe arrival at Fort Washington, for I was for a long Time very apprehensive for your Safety—The yellow Rascals of Langville sent us Word at Vincennes that they had three good Fires upon you at blue River, but it has proved to have been a Boat of Mr Vigo's which was there defeated, & again in ascending the Oubashe, in Company with Lieu. Melcher, he was attacked, possessed & plundered of every thing but Peltry—Mr Melcher visited L'anie a la graisse.9 By Numbers of Traders from Detroit I am even persuaded that the British have for some Purposes of late been engaged in many private Councils with the Indians—They have made them as large Presents as they were ever known to do at any Time even in War—And Elliot10 who acts under the Authority of Government has assured the Indians at River a la Roche upon the Mississippi & Lake Mischigan that they may have as many Goods as will fill the Otter Lake— 'Tis said that some of the Chiefs of the Creeks & Cherokees have lately been at Detroit—and there can be no Doubt that a very great Meeting of Warriors took Place at the Miamis Town upon the 9th Instant—All those Scoundrels now Sir profess to hold the Americans in the most supreme Degree of Contempt—They will they say send their Women to fight us & with Sticks instead of Guns—but I flatter myself they may be chastised into other Sentiments—the advanced State of the Season is however in their Favour; & they will undoubt- edly have it in their Power to gather & hide their Corn before War can be carried into their Country— Should they Sir instead of running away (which I little suspect) fight as men in their Situation ought to do—it appears to me, from the past Conduct of the Kentuckey militia that they will absolutely take themselves off—We know how their Officers are appointed & from repeated Experiments how little Dependence can be placed in them. You will pardon I hope my Dear Sir the Liberty of those Sug- gestions.—I mentioned to your Excellency when you quitted Kas- kaskias that in Case of any military operations I hoped to be em- ployed, & I will only add that 'twill be more than a little mortifying to me if I should be altogether neglected— With the highest respect & esteem I have the Honor to be Your Excellency's most obedient Humble Servant W Sargent • L'Anse a la Graisse, New Madrid, Spanish Louisiana. The episode is described in St. Clair to the Secretary of War, Sept. 19, 1790, post, p. 306, and Doughty to the same, Apr. 17, 1790, Harmar Papers (2W218), Wis. Hist. Soc. 10 Matthew Elliot, deputy Indian superintendent in the British service.
Page 302
302 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I expect to proceed on in a Day or two for Fort Washington with a Light Boat—the Judges are expected here from Vincennes by Water, for Judge Symmes would not be prevailed upon to remain there for the October Term—The Schooner still below—her Decks entirely ruined & twill be necessary her Bottom should be recaulked before she can be made any Use of—Would it be eligible to try to sew her?— [Endorsed] W. Sargent Augt. 17, 1790 JUDGES SYMMES AND TURNER TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers :ALS "] Louisville the 20th Augt1790. SIR While at Vincennes we did ourselves the honor of informing you that as the public affairs of the territory required of the legislative branch of Government some attention to the passing of such laws as were highly necessary, we were content to spend some weeks longer at that place for the purpose if convenient to you— We again beg leave Sir to assure you that we are willing and it is now our wish to spend a few days at Fort Stueben or Clarkesville 12 for the purpose of effecting so important a part of our duty, and shall be happy if it may be agreeable to You, the more especially as your honor was pleased this day to communicate to each of us that you had lately received intimation by letter from his Excellency Governor St Clair that some very important laws were necessary to be passed in the territory which demanded our immediate attention 13 You Sir was pleased further to mention to one of us (Mr Turner) that you thought it would be difficult for him to follow you to Fort Harmar as the public operations would probably be such as to render every mode of conveyance impracticable. If military movements render it necessary for Mr Prior 14 to proceed tomorrow, You sir with your baggage can be well accommodated in the boat commanded by Capt Mercer in which Mr Turner returns to Fort Washington If this proposition should be found inadmissible with you and you sir effect another seperation by leaving us we cannot be responsible for consequenses as every path is attended with eminent danger from the savages, waiving the circumstance of sickness to which we are all liable 15 11 In the handwriting of Symmes. u Established at the Falls of the Ohio, opposite Louisville, in 1783-1784 (James, ed., G. R. Clark Papers, IHC, xix, 424). 1» Letter not found. 14 Lt. Abner Prior (Heitman, comp., Hist. Reg. U. S. Army, I, 808). 1» Answered Aug. 22, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 329.
Page 303
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 303 We have the honor to be with due respect, Sir Your very humble servants, John C. Symmes G Turner Honh1" Winthrop Sargent Esqr [Endorsed] Recd at 8 oClock Sunday Morn* 22d after Mr Sargents Baggage was embarked to ascend the Ohio JUDGES SYMMES AND TURNER TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers :ALS "] Louisville August 22d 1790 1/2 past 1 o'clock pm. Sir, Your letter of this morning, we had the honour to receive an hour ago, but as the matter of it is no less "unexpected" to us than that of our's appears to have been to you, we are induced to offer a few words in reply. When we take a retrospective view of the difficulties which have, in some instances, hitherto lain in the way of effecting certain measures which we deemed and still deem essential, as well to the public service as to the discharge of our duty, both as judges and legislators; it can- not, we concieve be "improper" in us to embrace every opportunity that offers towards effecting such measures. At present the Territory may be said to be, in a manner, without laws; for such as have already been past are so few in number, that the least possible reflection must convince you, they are extremely inade- quate to form a ground work for the full administration of justice. The common law, alone, will not answer.17 We should have been happy if it had suited your convenience while at Vincennes, to have complied as well with our own wishes as those of the judges of the inferior courts established there by your proclama- tion,18 as expressed by their petition,18 praying that a fee bill might be passed before the legislative authority should leave the place. We had frequently before urged the necessity of such a bill; but it was not till those magistrates petitioned, that your honour was pleased to yield consent. But having afterwards told us that your presence was highly necessary at the Rapids, and as the time assigned for your departure thence was by far too near to permit such a law to be made, unless other acts then in hand were to be laid aside, both our and the petitioners' hopes were at once frustrated. l• In Turner's handwriting. "See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 43, n. 15. » July 3, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, m, 316. Not found.
Page 304
304 TERRITORIAL PAPERS We would wish to recal also to your memory the Fence law, which after having undergone many alterations (for we have always aimed at a spirit of accommodation) and been fairly engrossed in order to be passed, was equally unfortunate in being deprived of your signature.20 These are but a very few of the considerations which induced our communication of yesterday You are pleased to say that "no public business can delay us here" (at the rapids). You happen to be right as affects the present moment; but in making the assertion, you might have been mistaken—since the occurring duties of the judges are best known to themselves, and are not confined to the legislating and holding of courts alone. The ordinance providing for the government of this Territory is silent on many points with respect to the powers and duties of the principal officers.—Whenever this happens to be the case, we can only be governed by the obvious implication, or the general usages of the states in similar cases. Now admitting, that the power of calling together at any time and at any place in any one year the legislative authority of the Territory, is vested in the governour; yet we concieve there would be an acknowledged impropriety in requiring them to assemble at one place for the purpose of legislating at another—Nor do we think it either reasonable or proper that three officers of gov- ernment should make a tour of some hundreds of miles to visit one officer, when he, as but one person, might more easily come to the other three. Besides, Sir, the legislature is sufficiently "complete" without the addition of a fourth person: it would not, indeed, be so [MS. torn]21 We have the honour to [MS. torn] Sir, with great respect Your obe- dient humble Servants John Cleves Symmes. G. Turner The Honhle W. Sargent esq [Addressed] The honh,e Winthrop Sargent esquire Secretary of the W. Terr Fort Steuben [Endorsed] Judge Symmes August 1790 Recd this Letter 4 oClock 20 m" Sunday 22d August & just as I was embarking to ascend River— The Fence Law mentioned to have been engrossed ready for signing was objectionable as not having the Fences particularly enough described & in taking away a Mans Property for private Roads with- out making for him a proper Compensation which was mentioned repeatedly to the Judges & an alteration consented to, but never having been made it could not receive my Signature22— 20 Passed June 29, 1791 (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvil, 46-51). 21 Answered Aug. 30, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 330. 22 In Sargent's handwriting.
Page 305
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 305 JUDGE TURNER TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers:ALS] Cincinnati, Septem: 2? 1790 Sir, I have to acknowledge the receipt of two letters from you; one of the 30th ult°,23 the other of the 1" instant,24 which last I received this morning. The former which being addressed to Mr Symmes, jointly with myself in the absence of that gentleman, (and who has not yet appeared) I must decline replying to it at present. As to the letter of yesterday, I shall beg leave to submit here a few words in answer: they will be few, indeed, as I find my hands arrested by this official communication at a moment when employed in the very act of packing up my baggage in order to proceed myself to Marietta. I need not tell you, Sir, that the judges are the guardians of the laws, and cannot, without violating their consciences and trust, suffer any act or authority to be exercised within their jurisdiction, unknown to the Constitution and laws of the land. I found on my arrival at this place your proclamation posted up for giving effect on the fourth instant to two laws, which cannot possibly operate before the first day of January next. Of course, any procla- mation to the contrary is founded on no lawful authority, and might involve unwary magistrates in consequences of a very disagreeable nature. I should think it my indispensible duty to bring every mag- istrate to punishment, who should presume to act under such a proc- lamation.25 Motives of humanity, as well as duty, induced me to express my opinion to Mr Justice M^illan:28 And, Sir, you will always find me ready to maintain that opinion upon principles consonant to law. My conduct on this and every other occasion, I shall submit, with the greatest cheerfulness, to the strictest scrutiny whenever it may be lawfully demanded. I have chosen thus to counteract the evils which magistrates might incur, as a mode the most delicate towards yourself, out of other means that are within my power: and so far from exciting your displeasure, I hoped it would have merited your approbation. For after an at- tempt so derogatory to the legislative authority of this Territory, it surely did not become me to make any personal remonstrance to yourself. a Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 330. "Ibid., p. 332. a Aug. 30,1790, loe. cit. The laws in question are found in Pease (ed.), op. eit., pp. 28-29, 30-34. n William McMillan, first justice, general court of quarter sessions in Hamilton County, 1790; member of the first territorial House of Representatives, and suc- cessor of W. H. Harrison as territorial delegate in Congress. 126*50—34 21
Page 306
306 TERRITORIAL PAPERS But while I am so unfortunate as to differ with you in opinion as to some essentials respecting our public duties, give me leave, sir, to say, that it will always afford me the highest gratincat" as well to cherish the personal esteem I have long entertained for you, as to see the respective powers of the several officers of government well under- stood, and as well maintained. The duties powers and prerogatives of the governour are a trust that it is neither his duty to yield up to others, nor the duty of others to infringe. At the same time you will admit, that there are certain distinct powers vested in the judges of the general court, both as legislators and judicial officers, which they cannot part with but in violation of that confidence w"" has been re- posed in them by the supreme authority of the United States. With due consideration, I am, Sir, Your most obedient & humble Servant G Turner Mr Secretary Sargent GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Washington Papers :C] Marietta Septem* 19t 1790. Sir I have the honor to inform you that I arrived at this place on the 15th instant, and brought with me the last of the militia from Penn- sylvania—a detachment had moved before I reached Pittsburgh, and have since proceeded to Head quarters, and this morning major Doughty with this last party and the garrison of Fort Harmar, moves down likewise, and as the passage will not take more than four or five days the whole will probably assemble at Fort Washington at nearly the appointed time, as I am informed that those who are to come from Kentuckey will be punctual—It is with pain however I am obliged to mention, a deficiency in the Quota of Pennsylvania of upwards of two hundred men. It is possible that, from the farther power the Presi- dent has been pleased to invest me with, that deficiency may be sup- plied in time, but that can form no excuse for Executive of that State who never took the least step in consequence of the information they received from the President, that eventually a call might be made upon the State by me, and for want of which step the whole business might have fallen thro'—for the lieutenants of the counties hesitated about complying with the demand without their directions, and altho' they were applied to by them on the subject, and I know their application got to hand in time, for some of them I delivered myself, they did not give themselves the trouble to reply—and so little attention indeed had been given to the Presidents intimation that, in three of the four counties from which the draughts were to be made there was not, nor
Page 307
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 307 had not been for a long time a single officer in commission but the lieutenants. The depredations on the Ohio and the Wabash still continue—every day almost brings an account of some murder or robbery, and yester- day a number of horses were taken from this settlement—not long ago a boat belonging to Mr Vigo a gentleman of Post Vincennes was fired upon near the mouth of blue river27—This person the United States has been very much obliged to on many occasions, and is in the truth the most disinterested person I have almost ever seen—he had three men killed and was obliged in consequence to fall down the river— This party it seems had been designed to intercept me, for they reported that they had had three fair discharges at the governors boat, and expected they had killed him—in descending the river Mr Vigo's boat fell in with MrMelchor returning from the Tennessee, and attempted in company with him to ascend the Wabash—here they were attacked again—Melchor escaped and fell down it seems to Ance de la Graise, but the savages possessed themselves of Vigo's boat which they plun- dered of all his and the crews personal baggage and arms, but as she was navigated by frenchmen they suffered them to depart with the peltries, telling them that if they had not been in company with ameri- cans they would not have injured them, and that, if they found them in such again they would put them to death—Cap" M°Curdy likewise was fired upon between Fort Washington and this place, and had five or six men killed and wounded. Major Sargent who will have the honor to deliver this, arrived two days ago, from him you will receive particular information with respect to the country below, which makes it unnecssary for me to detail it— He has executed the business he was charged with at Post Vincennes in a masterly manner, and you will oblige me by mentioning him to the President in the most favorable point of view—but his proceedings will speak for themselves28—Mine on objects of the same nature in the country on the Missisippi have not been yet transmitted—The report was not made up when I was obliged to quit the country in a sudden and unexpected manner, and the situations I have ever been since rendered it impossible—as soon as the troops have moved from Fort Washington, for which place I shall embark to day I shall have leisure to attend to it, and it shall be forwarded together with a particular account of every thing you have desired to be informed of.28 The ammunition and quartermasters stores are not yet arrived, but from a favorable rise in the rivers, the waggons will not be obliged to go further than Redstone, there is reason to expect them every moment— Major Doughty leaves an officer and a party to escort them when they 27 See Sargent to St. Clair, Aug. 17, 1790, ante, p. 300. 18 Journal Exec. Proc., June 20-July 31, 1790, post, m, 313 et seg. » Submitted to the Secretary of State, Feb. 10,1791, post, pp. 323 et seq.
Page 308
308 TERRITORIAL PAPERS do arrive—That circumstance however puts it out of my power to for- ward the letter which I am directed to write to the commanding officer at Detroit by an officer;30 for he has but one at this place, I must there- fore look out for some private gentleman and engage him to perform that service—I have enclosed a copy of that letter,31 and have the honor to be with great respect. Sir Your most obedient Servant. (signed) Ar Sl Clair The honorable Major General Knox Secretary for the depart- ment of War. Major Sargent discharged at Post Sl Vincennes the accounts of the two Gamelins who were sent by major Hamtramck with the message to the Wabash indians amounting to two hundred & five dollars— and took their bills upon me which I had desired them to draw, after the accounts should be certified by major Hamtramck—had I met the major at Fort Washington I could have reimbursed him on the spot, but I cannot do it here nor with any convenience at Newyork—will you be pleased to advance it to him and charge it to my account as superintendant, for I know a disapointment would be very inconven- ient to him and you will much oblige me.32 I have since got a very genteel intelligent young [MS. torn] a son of Colonel Meigs,33 to go with the letter to Detroit. THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Washington Papers: D] Mount Vernon November 4th 1790. To the Secretary of War. Sir, I have received your letter of the 25th ultimo with its enclosures.34 I am apprehensive that Governor Sl Clair's communication of the object of the expedition to the Officer commanding at Detroit has been unseasonable and may have unfavorable consequences—it was cer- tainly premature to announce the operation intended until the troops 30 Dispatched Sept. 19, 1790, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 96. See also citations to the two following letters, infra. 31 Washington Papers (LC). » See Sargent to St. Clair, Aug. 17,1790, ante, p. 300. 33 Return Jonathan Meigs, jr., subsequently appointed in 1798 a territorial judge (Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 261). ** Oct. 25, 1790, Washington Papers (LC). The enclosures were Harmar to the Secretary of War, Sept. 2, 1790 (not found), and St. Clair to the latter, Sept. 19, 1790, ante, p. 306.
Page 309
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 309 were ready to move—since the Indians, through that channel, might receive such information as would frustrate the expedition.36 I am Sir, Your most obedient Servant [Endorsed] To The Secretary of War November 4. 1790 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :CM] Fort Washington, Novm 6th,1790 Sir On the 29th of last Month I had the honor to inform you gen- erally of the Success that attended General Harmar.37 I could not then give you the particulars as the Generals Letters had not reached me (the officer however who had them in charge got in a few days afterwards) it is not now necessary because he writes now himself. One thing however is certain that the Savages have got a most terrible stroke, of which nothing can be more decided proof than that they have not attempted to harrass the Army on its return—They arrived at this place on the 3d instant, in good Health and Spirits—There is not yet any Account from Major Hamtramck: I trust he also has been successful but this, I think is certain that no great Misfortune can have happened to him for in that Case, we should certainly have heard of it.38 Mr Denny,39 the Gentlemen who takes General Harmars dispatches I beg leave to mention to you in a particular manner, and if you will be pleased to do so to the President in his favor you may be assured he will not disappoint any Expectations that may be formed. He has every quality that I could wish a young Man who means to make the army his profession to possess. There are however some traits in his Character as a Man, that are not generally known, that would endear him—Out of the little pittance he receives he has maintained two aged Parents for a long time. I have the honor &° »5 See the Secretary of War to St. Clair, Aug. 23, 1790, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 162-163; the Secretary of State to the President, Aug. 29, 1790, Ford (ed), Writings Jefferson, v, 240; St. Clair to the Secretary of War, Sept. 19, 1790, ante, p. 306; St. Clair to the officer at Detroit, Sept. 19, 1790, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs I, 96. m Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 190. "Ibid., pp. 188-189. "See Symmes to Dayton, Nov. 4, 1790, Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 132-138; Hamtramck to Harmar, Nov. 2, 1790, Harmar Papers (2W361), Wis. Hist. Soc. The latter contains a full report of Hamtramck's operation against the Wabash Indians. 39 Capt. Ebenezer Denney, author of "Military Journal of Major Ebenezer Denney", Memoirs Hist. Soc. Pa., VII, 237-409.
Page 310
310 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [MHS:Knox Papers :ALS] (Private) Mount Vernon Nov* 19th 1790. My dear Sir, I have received your letter of the 10th instt,40 and will declare to you without reserve, that my forebodings with respect to the Expedition against the Wabash Indians are of disappointment; and a disgraceful termination under the conduct of B. Gen1 Harmer.41— I expected little from the moment I heard he was a drunkard.42— I expected less as soon as I heard that on this account no confidence was reposed in him by the people of the Western Country.—and I gave up all hope of success, as soon as I heard that there were disputes with him about command.— The latter information is from report only; but the report of bad news is rarely without foundation.—If the issue of this Expedition is honorable to the Concerters of it, & favorable to our Arms, it will be double pleasing to me; but my mind, from the silence which reigns, and other circumstances, is prepared for the worst;—that is—for expence without honor or profit.— If any thing more than the statement of this business for the infor- mation of Congress should occur to you, previous to my arrival, be so good as to digest it, for it is my wish to have every matter which may occur to the heads of Departments as well as to myself, ready, if proper to lay before that body, at the opening of the Session.43—With sincere friendship, & affect8 regard I am—ever Y" G° Washington PS. I expect to commence my journey for Philadelphia on Monday— but from the State of the Roads after the incessant and heavy Rains which have fallen, my progress must be slow.—GW Majr Gen1 Knox. Private [Con]fiden[tial] 40 Washington Papers (LC). 41 An official report from Harmar, Nov. 4, 1790, with enclosures, was not received until Dec. 12 (A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, 1, 104-106), with the arrival of Ebenezer Denny, Harmar's adjutant ("Mil. Journal", Memoirs Hist. Soc. Pa., vii, 355); but unofficial reports had reached the President through other channels, as for example in a letter from Governor Clinton of New York, Nov. 26, which was received by the President Nov. 30 (the President to Clinton, Dec. 1, 1790, Sparks, ed., Writings Washington, x, 131-137). In addition to the official report of Nov. 4, noted above, the Secretary of War received further official dispatches from Harmar, Nov. 23 and 26, 1790, as mentioned in a letter of the former, Jan. 31, 1791, suggesting that for his own reputation Harmar should request a court of inquiry (Harmar Papers, 2W394, Wis. Hist. Soc.). For court of inquiry, see A.S.P., Mil. Affairs, 1, 20-37. "As to Harmar's drinking habits, see letter of warning from the Secretary of War, Sept, 3, 1790, Harmar Papers (2W324), Wis. Hist. Soc. ■ Harmar's report of Nov. 4, 1790, was laid before Congress Dec. 14 (A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 104).
Page 311
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 311 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE INHABITANTS OF GALLIPOLIS 4 4 [SD: N.W.Terr. Papers, I-A:C] N° 25" [November 21, 1790] Gentlemen, It was with great pleasure, that I heard of the arrival of a number of french men in this country—bound to each other as the french and americans are by the dearest of all ties, I hoped that here they would have found that independance and happiness, which is the reasonable wish of all mankind; and although it may have been de- layed, it is my fervent wish as it is a well grounded hope, that it has been only delayed. I feel gentlemen very sensibly for your situation and nothing on my part shall be wanting to render it as agreeable as circumstances will admit of; but in the establishment of new settlements there are diffi- culties to be encountred; patience and perseverance will get the better of them, and when they are got over, they become real pleasures on reflection; I know the generous sentiments of french men too well, to fear that difficulties arising from the nature of the case, can discourage them. I am altogether unacquainted with the nature of the contract that has been made with the Scioto company, or what may be the specific pretentions of individuals—The laws of the country will however com- pel justice to be done, and those laws will be extended to you as early as it is possible—They can know the Scioto Company as an individual only, and their course must be general, you will therefore readily per- ceive the impossability of a person being appointed to judge expressly between the Colonists and that company. Courts will be established where justice will be duly, and regularly administered according to the laws, and where neither favour nor influence will have any weight; and it will be among the first matters I shall attend to, after my arrival at Marietta, to make those arrangments for your security and peace; but as they must all pass through the Secretary's office they cannot be taken earlier. After having borne with the difficulties of your situation hitherto, I intreat you to bear with them yet but a very little longer, for I am as strongly impressed with the necessity of an established police, as well as a militia as you yourselves can be, and be assured that it is my warmest wish that you may find in this land of liberty that happiness which is the reward and the incentive to an active life, to procure which for you, Gentlemen, you may depend upon my best endeavours.46 M The petition to which this letter is an answer is missing. See report of St. Clair. Feb. 10, 1791, post, p. 337. «5 Enclosed in the above-mentioned report. «• See petition of Dec. 22, 1792, post, p. 422.
Page 312
312 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I thank you Gentlemen very sincerely, for your good wishes, and am, Gentlemen, Ar Sl Clair. Gallipolis Nov7 21" 1790. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO SECRETARY SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers: C «] Marietta, November 27th, 1790. Dear Sir:—I have the pleasure to inform you that I got back to this place the day before yesterday in good health, notwithstanding an attack of the gout which laid hold of me on the River the second day after leaving Fort Washington. My position was a bad one, but the Brimstone proved once more too strong for it with all that advantage. It was with pain I heard of your being ill on the road; I hope you got down safe and that your health is reestablished. On considering all circumstances, I believe that Cincinnati will be found the most proper place for the seat of the government. If, therefore, you should have an opportunity to secure any of the lands you mentioned, I would be glad to be concerned in a small part. Without something like a farm, it will not be possible to exist in this country, but neither my inclination nor my resources permit me to engage largely, and besides it appears from the increasing population of this country that the Governor will have little time to spare to the cultivation of the earth. He must, I believe, be for a long time to come almost always passing from place to place, unless a division of the Territory should take effect. You may probably have been able to learn something about that matter. If it is likely to happen, this place would not be an improper site for one of the divisions. Should however, the posts be delivered agreeably to the Treaty, I have no doubt but the seat of government must be transferred to Detroit which in any provisional measures you may think of it will be proper to keep in view. I have it in contemplation to visit Philadelphia this Winter, and to that end to leave this place as soon as I can get the civil arrangements for the French settlement thro' which will not probably require more than a week.48 This, however, need not make any alteration in your plans, for should you be able to return by Christmas, which I think was what you proposed, the little interregnum that will happen 47 From a typewritten copy. 4 8 St. Clair to the Secretary of State, Feb. 10,1791, post, p. 337; the same to the French inhabitants, Nov. 21, 1790, ante, p. 311. The reference is to the party of French emigrants who settled the Scioto grant. See indenture between the Board of Treasury and Cutler and Sargent, Oct. 27, 1787, ante, p. 85.
Page 313
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 313 between my departure and your arrival will be of no manner of consequence. Indeed, it is necessary—as well on account of some public business as my private affairs, that I should be in Philadelphia about the time that Congress will meet. General Harmar has made a very succesful compaign, tho' you will regret with me the loss of our friend, Major Wyllis, who was sacri- ficed by the militia. They left him with his handful of continental troops to sustain the attack of a large body of Indians. Every man of them fell but three. They sold their lives, however, dear. Indeed, there never has been any affair with the Indians in which they lost so many men as in this campaign. We have as yet no certain informa- tion from Major Hamtramck. Had he been unfortunate we would have heard it long ago. The reports from Kentucky are that the Indians fled before him every where—that four of their towns and a vast quantity of provisions had been destroyed, and that that part of the militia had got home without the loss of a man. A little time will give us the truth, but it is not improbable you have it already thro' the wilderness, for I have been seventeen days upon the River. Adieu—Believe me ever, dear Sir, Your very humble servant, A. St. Clair To Winthrop Sargent, Esq. REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC:Washington Papers:AD] [December 10, 1790 »] Governor St Clairs proposal of obtaining a cession of territory from the Wabash Indians at this peculiar time,60 seems liable to several objections51 1" It is not for the interest of the United States to extend their territory at present. They possess abundantly more Land, than they can profitably sell. But was there a market for more Land the policy of scattering our people in distant thin settlements may be justly disputed. It will be our true wisdom to condense our population instead of dispersing it. Besides the expence of protecting such distant settlements greatly exceeds the value of them, whether considered as purchasers of the Land, as consumers of articles contributing to the revenue, or as con- stituting a strength of any real use to the empire. "This arbitrary date is bracketed on the mounting of the document. M The paper referred to has not been found. 51 Cf. observations of the Secretary of War to the President, June 15 and July 9, 1789, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 13. 53-54.
Page 314
314 TERRITORIAL PAPERS 2d,y To grasp at additional territory will give the expedition an avaricious aspect. In this point of view it will disgrace the govern- ment." The motives of the expedition ought to appear as they really are— A clear and uncompounded dictate of Justice to punish a banditti of robbers, and murderers, who have refused to listen to the voice of peace and humanity. and as a terror to warn other tribes against the commission of similar crimes. It will not materially lessen the charge to assert the United States propose to pay the Indians for the lands—because it is a well known fact, that unless they could be civilized, and learn the arts of agricul- ture, the taking away their lands for the usual pitiful considerations, is taking away the means of supporting their lives. But it would be a difficult circumstance to convince the people of the United States, of the propriety of paying any considerable sums to the obnoxious tribes, whose enormities have caused the expence of so much treasure, and blood. To obtain Lands of the Wabash Indians at this time, either by con- quest or by purchase would afford such of the people of Georgia, as are dissatisfied with the creek treaty, and the Yazous and Tennessee companies, with cause for impeaching the rectitude of the General Government, for extending its own territory and circumscribing the States. If deputies from the hostile tribes should be sent to Fort Washington as the Governor supposes, they must be fed while they remain at that post, and upon their departure they might receive some blankets. But nothing more at present. They ought to be made to feel the in- conveniencies of their conduct— It would have an absurd appearance, to raise an army at great ex- pence to destroy the Indians corn, and upon the objects being effected, to replace the corn which had been so destroyed— [Endorsed] Report of the Secy of War upon a proposition to pur- chase land from the Wabash Indians SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W.Terr. Papers, l:ALS] Philadelphia 13th Decr 1790— Sir The enclosed Letter,63 which I intended should have accom- panied my last Official Communications from the Western Territory, has by some mistake been omitted.— 12 See instuctions to Putnam, May 22, 1792, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, p. 260; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 234. ■ Aug. 1, 1790, ante, p. 295.
Page 315
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 315 Permit me now Sir to lay it before you requesting, only, as much Attention to it as your Excellency may deem proper— with the highest Respect I have the Honour to be your Excellency's most devoted & most humble Servant Winthrop Sargent The President of the United States [Addressed] The President of the United States Philadelphia THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Jefferson Papers :LPC] [December 14, 1790] The Secretary of state having had under his consideration the jour- nal of the proceedings of the Executive in the North-Western terri- tory, thinks it his duty to extract therefrom, for the notice of the President of the U.S. the articles of Apr. 25. June 6. 28. & 29. some of which are hereto annexed.64 Concieving that the regulations, purported in these articles, are beyond the competence of the Executive of the said government, that they amount in fact to laws, & as such could only flow from it's regular legislature. that it is the duty of the General government to guard it's subordinate members from the encroachments of each other, even where they are made through error or inadvertence, and to cover it's citizens from the exercise of powers not authorized by the laws, the Secretary of state is of opinion that the said articles be laid before the Attorney General for consideration, and, if he finds them to be against law, that his opinion be communicated to the Governor of the North-Western territory for his future conduct.65 Dec. 14.1790 Th: Jefferson REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters: AL] [Dec. 14. 1790] The Secretary of state having had under his consideration the Report, made by the Secretary of the government North West of the Ohio, of his proceedings for carrying into effect the resolution of Con- gress of Aug. 29. 1788.56 respecting the lands of the inhabitants of Post Vincennes," makes the following Report thereon to the President of the United States. 44 See Journal Exec. Procs., under above dates, post, III, 301, 308, 314, 315. u See the President to St. Clair, Jan. 2, 1791, post, p. 320. M Ante, p. 145. "See Sargent to the President, July 31,1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 323.
Page 316
316 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Resolution of Congress of Aug. 29. 1788. had confirmed in their possessions & titles the French & Canadian inhabitants & other settlers at that post, who, in or before the year 1783. had settled there, & had professed themselves citizens of the U. S. or any of them, and had made a donation to every head of a family, of the same description, of 400. acres of land, part of a square to be laid off adjoin- ing the improvements at the post. The Secretary of the North Western government, in the absence of the Governour, has carried this resolution into effect, as to all the claims to which he thought it could be clearly applied. there remain however the following descriptions of cases on which he asks further instructions. 1. Certain cases within the letter of the resolution, but rendered doubtful by the condition annexed to the grants of lands in the Illi- nois country. the cases of these claimants, fifteen in number, are specially stated in the paper hereto annexed N°. 2. & the lands are laid off for them, but remain ungranted till further order.68 2. Certain persons who, by removals from one part of the territory to another, are out of the letter of the Resolution, but within it's equity, as they concieve. 3. Certain heads of families, who became such soon after the year 1783. who petition for a participation of the donation, & urge extraor- dinary militia service to which they are exposed. 4. 150. acres of land within the village, granted, under the former government of that country, to the Piankeshaw Indians, & on their removal sold by them in parcels to individual inhabitants, who in some instances have highly improved them both before & since 1783. 5. lands granted both before & after 1783. by authority from the Commandant of the post, who, according to the usage under the French & British governments, thinking himself authorised to grant lands, delegated that authority to a court of civil & criminal jurisdic- tion,69 whose grants before 1783. amount to 26.000 acres, & between that & 1787 (when the practice was stopped) to 22,000 acres. they are generally in parcels from 400. acres down to the size of house lots; & some of them under considerable improvement, some of the ten- ants urge that they were induced by the court itself to come & settle these lands, under assurance of their authority to grant them, & that a loss of the lands & improvements will involve them in ruin.—besides these small grants, there are some much larger, sometimes of many M Instructions from Acting Governor Sargent to Baird, July 13, 1790, ante, p. 285. In the original document the various sections are not distinguished by numbers. "See F. Bosseron and others to Sargent, July 3, 1790, ante, p. 282.
Page 317
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 317 leagues square, which a sense of their impropriety has prevented the grantees from bringing forward.—many pretended grants too of this class are believed to be forgeries, & are therefore to be guarded against. 6. 2400 acres of good land, & 3000 acres of sunken d° held under the French, British, & American governments, as Commons for the use of the inhabitants of the village generally, & for 30. years past kept under inclosure for these purposes. The legislature alone being competent to authorize the grant of lands in cases as yet unprovided for by the laws, the Secretary of state is of opinion that the Report of the Secretary of the North Western govern- ment, with the papers therein referred to, should be laid before Con- gress for their determination. authentic copies of them are herewith inclosed to the President of the United States.60 [Signature torn] [Endorsed] Report of the Secretary of State upon the Report of the Secretary of the Western Territory—Decr 14th 1790— TOBIAS LEAR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Misc. Letters :ALS] United States Decr 16th 1790 Sir, By the President's Command I have the honor to transmit the enclosed letter from Winthrop Sargent Esqr Secy of the Western Ter- ritory, to the President of the United States: which the President requests may be put with the communications from the Western Territory.81— I have the honor to be with the highest respect Sir. Yr most Ob. St Tobias Lear— S.p.U.S — The Secv of State— [Addressed] To The Secy of State Decr 16th 1790— M Transmitted to Congress by the President, Dec. 23, 1790; printed, with en- closures, in A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 9-16. See also report of Senate committee, ibid., p. 17, and act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339. "Aug. 1, 1790, ante, pp. 295.
Page 318
318 TERRITORIAL PAPERS TOBIAS LEAR TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [SD:Misc. Letters :ALS] United States DecT 28.1790 By the President's command T. Lear has the honor to transmit to the Attorney Gen1 of the United States the copy of a note of the 14th Inst. from the Secy of State to the President of the U. S. with sundry extracts from the Journal of the Proceedings in the Executive De- partmt of Governmnt in the Territory of the U. S. North-west of the Ohio upon which the Opinion of the Atty Gen1 is requested by the President.— Tobias Lear— S.p.U.S. The Atty Gen1 of the U. S— [Addressed] To The Atty Gen1 of the U. S. Decr 28th 1790 [Endorsed] The President of the [United States] MEMORIAL OF SECRETARY SARGENT TO CONGRESS [MHS:Sargent Papers: ADS] [December, 1790] To the honourable the Senate and house of representatives of the United States of America The memorial of Winthrop Sargent most respectfully sheweth That by the Act of the United States which authorises and directs the Secretary of their western Territory to discharge at certain times the Duties of the Governour 62 he has been involved in additional Expenses, for which no provision has been made by Government, and which their memorialist's Finances do not enable him to defray— That the Duties of the Secretary are very much multiplied and increased by the Division of the western Territory. into Districts and Counties—all of which are to be furnished with Copies of the Laws, proclamations and Ordinances of Government from his Office, and which has so multiplied the necessary writings that no one person though devoting his whole Time is adequate to the performance thereof And in addition to this he is informed by Governour Sl Clair that 'tis expected he should consider himself as Secretary to the Indian Commission, a Business which in the western Territory must probably for a long time demand much attention— All which the memorialist takes the Liberty of laying before the honourable the Senate and house of representatives •> Act of Aug. 7, 1789, ante, p. 203.
Page 319
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 319 most respectfully asking that they would be pleased to receive the same into Consideration and order such additional provision for his Office as may appear to them reasonable and proper 83 Winthrop Sargent GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [OSL:St. Clair Papers: C "] Philadelphia, [no date86], 1790 Sir: I have the honor to envelope the Papers you were pleased to desire Yesterday—In a former Conversation you had suggested a doubt whether the Laws of the western Territory that had been made (in contradistinction to being adopted) by the Legislature would be binding upon the People—the same doubt had arisen in my mind early, but I gave way to the Opinion of the Judges, and to the necessity of the case—they were decidely of the Opinion that, from a clause in the Ordinance which declared the Laws "adopted or made" by the Governor or Judges to be binding during the existence of the tempo- rary Government, if not disapproved by Congress, gave them full power to legislate in that manner; and it is certain that, from the peculiar Circumstances of the Country, in many Cases, no Laws of the original States would be found to apply to their Occasions exactly without alterations, and, if they were altered to those Occasions, they would cease, it would seem, to be the same Laws.86—They have doubts likewise whether the Laws of the united States can have course in the Territory unless it be especially named in them, and it has been proposed to me that such as may be necessary should be adopted; but, from the words of the Ordinance which gave the Power to adopt Laws, it is doubtful whether the Laws of the united States can be comprehended. I do not recollect any Case that has yet happened where any inconvenience has followed—but I do not know how Treason, for example, against the united States, could be pun- ished, and yet it may be committed in a Territory. No provision has been made for an Attorney General—the power to appoint one is clear enough,67 but the infant situation of the Country forbids the People being burdened with Salary, at the same time it seems to be a very necessary Office, were it only as Law Counselor to the Governor.— ■ Cf. Sargent to the President, Dec. 30, 1793, post, p. 463, and report of the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 31, 1794, post, p. 473. M Printed also, with variations, in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 163-164. 1* Probably December, since the Governor was in Philadelphia at that time and the question of his powers was then under discussion. « See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 43, n. 15. ■ See St. Clair to the President, August, 1789, ante, p. 208.
Page 320
320 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I am sure I have felt the want of such Counsel very much, and the Persons who may succeed me in the Office may be in like Circum- stances; and it is not expected that any Person of sufficient Abilities will accept the appointment without a Salary, especially when it is considered that they have a Circuit to attend to of more than a thou- sand Miles in every year. I shall be very much obliged to you Sir for your Advice about the Possessions of the ancient Settlers on the Mississippi, and that if you think it necessary, you would bring the doubtful points I have mentioned before the President of the united States, and permit me to observe, Sir, that when the very great Distance that Country is and ever will be from the Seat of the Gov- ernment, there seems to be a necessity for the Titles of Confirmation being made within the Territory or at least a Provision that they may be put on record there. I have the honor &° The HONhle The Attorney General THE PRESIDENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [Huntington Library: ALS "*] (Private) Philadelphia Jany 2d 1791. Dear Sir, In the Journals of the Proceedings of the Executive in the North Western Territory, there appears to be certain regulations made by the Executive under the Articles of the 25th of April—6th 28th & 29th of June last,69 which can, with propriety, only be established by Laws.70— In noticing these, my mind naturally recurred to your letter to me dated at Cahokea on the first of May last,71 wherein you observe, that the absence of the Judges had embarrassed you a great deal; and after waiting for them as long as possible, that you had been under the necessity of directing by proclamation certain regulations suited to the peculiar circumstances of the Country.—These you had no doubt would be soon confirmed by law—and the necessity of the case offered an excuse for having exceeded your proper Powers.— The imperfect State in which the Legislation of the North Western Territory is—the want which the Executive has often felt of the neces- sary coadjutors to adopt even the most urgent Laws—and the peculiar situation of a frontier Country, are circumstances which may not strike every one who will observe that the Executive has gone beyond 88 Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 198-199. There is a photo- stat of the original in the Library of Congress. • See Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 301, 308, 314, 315. 70 See the Secretary of State to the President, Dec. 14, 1790, ante, p. 315, and Lear to the Attorney General, Dec. 28,1790, ante, p. 318. The report of the Attor- ney General has not been found. 71 Ante, p. 244.
Page 321
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 321 [his] proper powers. It therefore becomes a matt[er] of high impor- tance that the utmost circumspection should be observed in the conduct of the Executive; for there are not wanting persons who would rejoice to find the slightest ground of clamor against public Characters—and paying no regard to the absolute necessity of the case which caused a momentary stretch of power—nor the public good which might be produced by it, they would seize the occasion of making impressions unfavorable to Government & possibly productive of disagreeable effects.— I have therefore thought it best to give you this intimation in a private and friendly letter, that by circumspection ma[lice] itself may be disarmed. With complim[ents] of the Season and greatest esteem & regard I am—Dear Sir Your Most Obedt Servt G° Washington Governor Sl Clair THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :LS] [January 14, 1791] The Secretary of War, to whom the President of the United States was pleased to refer, certain resolves of the Legislature of Virginia72 respecting "an act to enable the officers and soldiers of the Virginia line on continental establishment to obtain titles to certain lands lying North West of the river Ohio between the Little Miami and Scioto",73 and a petition of the officers of the late Virginia line, to the said Leg- islature upon the same subject;74 as transmitted by his excellency the governor of Virginia, in his letter of the 4th of January 1791.75 Reports, That as said Resolves & petition, set forth certain inconveniencies to which the officers of the said line, will be subjected by the operation of the aforesaid law passed the last session of Congress; it will be proper that the said resolves, and the petition, should be laid before the Congress of the United States.76 All which is humbly submitted to the President of the United States. H Knox Secy of War War department, 14th January 1791. [Endorsed] From The Secy of War Jany 15th 1791 72 A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 17; Va. Stat., Hening (ed.), xm, 236. ™ Act of Aug. 10, 1790, ante, p. 296. » A.S.P., op. cit., I, 18. »Ibid., p. 17. 71 See the President to Congress, Jan. 17, 1791, loc. cit. 128650—34 22
Page 322
322 TERRITORIAL PAPERS GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL:St. Clair Papers :D] [February 2, 1791] Sir A few days ago I submitted to the Attorney General the form of a Patent for the confirmation of the Lands by the inhabitants on the Mississippi and at Post Vincennes. By the Instructions of Con- gress of the 29th of August77 I had conceived myself authorised to send such Patents of confirmation and that it was expected from me, but the Attorney is of Opinion that the Instructions does not give the Power to that End, and consequently a Law for the purpose is neces- sary 78—I would beg the favor Sir that you will bring the Subject before Congress, for it is of importance that those People be quieted in their Possessions as soon as possible.79 With great Respect &c Feb" 2d 1791 Tho' Jefferson Esqr Secretary of State GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL:St. Clair Papers :D] [February 10, 1791] Sir I beg leave to present the enclosed Report of my proceedings in the Illinois Country in the Course of the last year, and to suggest that you lay it before Congress. A part, if not the whole of them has, no doubt been transmitted by the Secretary from time to time; but, as I was directed by the Resolution of Congress of the 28th of August 178880 to report specially these are now collected into one View. I am sensible Sir that it may have been expected to have been sooner, but the Situation I have been in ever since last June last, during which time I have been obliged to travel near upon five thousand Miles, either in an open Boat or upon Horseback, and often separated from my Papers rendered it impossible. The inquiring into the Claims and Titles of the people of that Country which are all in french and the necessity of translating every public communication into that Lan- guage, without any Person to assist me, for no Person that had a competent knowledge of both was to be found, was a very laborious Business will account for some Papers which accompany the Report appearing in that Language, and that I had not always leisure to make the translations into English will be an excuse for that impropriety. "Ante, p. 146. 78 A search made by the Department of Justice fails to disclose the opinion of the Attorney General. 78 See act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 339. "Aug. 29 is probably intended; see ante, pp. 146-147.
Page 323
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 323 REPORT OF GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I: ADS "] [February 10, 1791] Report of the Governor of the Territory of the united States north west of the Ohio 82 Pursuant to the Resolution of Congress of the 28th of August 1788, and in Obedience to the Instructions of the President of the united States of the 6th of October 1789,83 1 embarked at Fort Harmar for Kaskaskia on the 20th day of December following and arrived on the 5th day of March 1790. The great length of time consumed in this Voyage was owing to a delay met with at the Falls of Ohio for want of Provisions for the Escort—to being afterwards frozen up in the Mississippi for fifeteen days; and to being again obliged to stop to repair the Damage sustained by the Vessel, which was hurried by the impetuosity of the Stream upon a sunken Tree in the middle of the River, where the Danger of being cast away was very narrowly escaped. Immediatly on my Arrival the County of Sl Clair was erected by Proclamation:84—a Placart was published requiring the "Inhabitants to exhibit a State of their Claims to Lands in that Quarter, and a List of the Heads of Families.85 It was a considerable time before any Claims were presented, owing partly to the Ignorance of the People, very few of whom are able either to read or write, and partly to their being entirely unacquainted with the English Language:—they were at length brought forward, and such of them as were found to come within the Resolution of Congress are contained in the Paper marked N° 1.*» N° 2 84 is a List of the Inhabitants, and N° 3 a copy of the Placart.87 No Plan of the Town of Kaskaskia could be found either in the public Offices or in the Hands of Individuals; I was therefore obliged to order one to be taken (of which N° 4 is a Copy M) as it would other- wise have been impossible to describe the Lotts which were to be con- firmed. Mr Samuel Baird was appointed to do that Duty, as well as to survey the Lands held by the People, and to run the Lines that had 81 Printed also, with many variations, in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 164- 180. See the Secretary of State to the President, Feb. 17, 1791, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 18-19. 85 See St. Clair to the President, May 1, 1790, ante, p. 244. ■ Smith (ed.), op. eit., pp. 125-126. 84 Apr. 27, 1790 Journal Exec. Procs., post, m, 301. 85 Mar. 7,1790, ibid., p. 296. 88 Ante, pp. 253-258. 87 Mar. 7, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 296. 88 Not found.
Page 324
324 TERRITORIAL PAPERS been directed by Congress to embrace the Donations. On an Exami- nation of the Claims, however, it was found that many Grants of Land had been made which would fall to the eastward of the Line to be drawn from the Mouth of the River au Marie; and as all Grants that proceeded either from the Government of France, that of Great Britain, or of the State of Virginia on or before the Year 1783 were to be confirmed, the running of that Line was delayed until Congress should be informed that it would not take in all the Claims, and there- for appeared to be incurring an unnecessary Expense. Orders of Survey were issued for all the Claims that appeared to be founded agreeably to the Resolution of Congress, and Surveys were made of the greater part of them—a Part only of those Surveys, however, have been returned because the People objected to paying the Sur- veyor; and it is too true that they are ill able to pay. The Illinois Country, as well as that upon the Ouabash, has been involved in great Distress ever since it fell under the american Dominion:—with great cheerfulness the People furnished the Troops under General Clarke, and the Illinois Regiment with every thing they could spare, and often with much more than they could spare with any Conveni- ence to themselves:—most of the Certificates for those Supplies are still in thei» Hands, unliquidated and unpaid; and, in many Instances where Application for payment has been made to the State of Vir- ginia, under whose authority the Certificates were granted, it has been refused.—The Illinois Regiment being disbanded, a Set of Men, pre- tending the authority of Virginia, embodied themselves; and a Scene of general Depradation and Plunder ensued:89—to this succeeded three succesive and extraordinary Innundations from the Misssippi, which either swept away their Crops or prevented their being planted:—the loss of the greatest part of their Trade with the Indians, which was a great Resource, came upon them at this juncture, as well as the hostile incursions of some of the Tribes which had ever before been in friendship with them; and to these was added the loss of their whole last Crop of Corn by an untimely frost:—extreme Misery could not fail to be the Consequence of such accumulated Misfortunes. The Paper N° 5 contains the Orders for a Compensation to the Surveyor;90 and N° 6 is the Representation of the People praying to be excused from paying it.91 A Gentleman, of the Name of Todd, had been appointed by the Governor of Virginia Lieutenant of the County of Illinois,92 and some w Documents illustrating the state of anarchy in the French village of the Illi- nois country are in Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 202-439. M June 5, 1790, ante, p. 276; referred to in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1791, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 18-22, as enclosure no. 6. "June 9,1790, ante, p. 279; referred to in the report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1791, as enclosure no. 7. <« Dec. 12, 1778 (Alvord, ed., Cahokia Recs., IHC, II, liii).
Page 325
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 325 few Grants of Land are said to have been made by him, altho' by his Instructions, which he put upon record at Kaskaskia, he has no Authority to that purpose, but seems rather to have been restrained:— A Copy of those Instructions were transmitted by the Secretary. On Mr Todds leaving that part of the Country a Person of the Name of De Numbrun 93 was substituted, who made Grants of Land without number: The Power of granting Lands was also asumed by the civil Courts that had been established, and that assumed Power they used very liberally, still pretending, however, that they had been authorised so to do by Mr Todd, who is stiled Grand Judge for the united States.—It is most probable that such power was never delegated to the Courts by Mr Todd; at least it does not appear. All those Grants have been rejected; but I beg leave to suggest, that it might be proper to allow a right of preemption to those who have actually settled and made improvements under them. Some of the Parties seem, respectively, to have had two different Objects in view—the Applicants, the engrossing Lands for a very small Con- sideration; and the Grantors the accumulation of perquisites: the Courts and sub Lieutenants having exacted four Dollars for each Grant There are a number of american Settlers in possession of such Grants, whose claims have been equally rejected—their Case seems to be a hard one—not doubting the authority of the Courts which they saw every day excercised,94 they applied for Lands and obtained them, and made Settlements in consequence, distinct from those of the french; but having removed into that Country after the Year 1783 they do not come within the Resolution of Congress which de- scribes who are to be considered as ancient Settlers, and confirmed in their Possessions;—As Americans they have been the peculiar Objects of Indian Depredation, while their Neighbours the french, from having had much intercourse with the Indians, and frequently intermarrying with them, until very lately were generally safe;— they have in consequence been driven off of the Lands they had improved, and have lost both their time and their labour. N° 7 is a Representation from them upon this Subject.95 Having finished the Business at Kaskaskia, as far as it was pos- sible at that time, on the 5h day of April I embarked, and proceeded up the Missisippi to Cahokia, having stopped at Fort de Chartres, and visited the Village of the Prairie du Rocher which is about a League distant from it, in Land, on the way. Mr Baird had been 83 Jacques Timothe Boucher, Sieur de Monbreun, a French-Canadian nobleman, for whom see ibid., xix, cxxiv-cxxviii; id., Kask. Recs. (IHC, v), 320-322. 8< Illustrative documents are printed id., Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 153, 565, 587, 591. M May 23, 1790, ante, p. 252.
Page 326
326 TERRITORIAL PAPERS directed, to make the Surveys there,96 as well as at Kaskaskia, and the same Objections to paying for them were raised there as at the latter place. N° 8 is a power to certain of the Inhabitants to to make Representations to me on the Subject, which was done.97 N° 9 is a Plot of the reserved Tract including Fort Chartres,98 It is however to be observed that part of this Tract appears to have been granted when the Country was in possession of the French. From the Mouth of the Kaskaskia River, which is a very beautiful stream that takes its rise a great way in the Country, and is navigable by Boats for a considerable distance, and on the west bank of which the Town is situated, the Missisippi is very rapid as indeed it is from the mouth of the Ohio to that place, with a great many very difficult and dangerous passes:—every where indeed the Current, in the middle of the stream, is too strong to be overcome by Oars; Boats are therefore obliged to keep as close to the shore as possible, and then in many places cannot ascend without towing—the navigation of course might be very easily interrupted, or prevented altogether, were the Spaniards or the Indians disposed to attempt it; and the more so as, in some of the most difficult places, it is necessary to keep the spanish Shore for bound; a Communication however from Fort Massac on the Ohio (or even some distance above it) with Kaskaskia, by Land, may easily be opened:—the distance is from fifty to sixty Miles—the Country is high and the Soil proper enough for a Road, and no considerable Water intervenes but the River au Vase, which is generally fordable at large Riffle which presents itself directly in the Course:—the tedious and dangerous navigation of the Missisippi would be thereby avoided. Above the Misouri River, the Missisippi becomes comparatively a gentle and pellucid Stream, whereas below, it is at all Seasons extreme- ly turbid—above the Illinois River it is truly a gentle stream, its current, as I have been informed no where exceeding three Miles an hour. The Village of Cahokia is situated on a small Creek of the same name, in a fertile plain and about half a League from its Mouth; but, being surrounded with Marshes, it is very unhealthy in the latter part of the Summer and the Autumn, the River however affords a safe and convenient harbour for Boats—it discharges itself nearly opposite to the spanish Village of Sl Louis, and is navigable for two Miles beyond the Town.—half a League lower down the Country and about an equal distance from the Missisippi is the small Village of the Prairie du pont, which is generally considered as part of Cahokia. Here, as at Kaskas- h See document under date of June 5, 1790, ante, p. 276. "June 7, 1790, ante, p. 278. "Not reproduced here. It is enclosure no. 8 in the Secretary' of State's report to the President, Feb. 17, 1791 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 18-22), and is found in the Senate file under that date.
Page 327
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 327 kia, no Plan of the Town was to be found, and of course I was obliged to order one to be taken, but a copy of it does not accompany this Report, as by some accident it has been left behind.—The Villages at the Prairies du Rocher and du Pont do not appear to have been ever laid out—The People have built upon the Lands their Lands, which have generally small fronts, in a contiguous, but irregular, manner, which has given to those Places something of the Appearance of Towns." The same steps were taken to obtain a knowledge of the Lands that were claimed by the People here as at Kaskaskia, and after due Examination Orders of Survey for such as fell within the Resolu- tion of Congress were put into the Hands of Mr Girardin,1 the only Person that could be found in all that Country who understood any thing of Surveying—there are a good many Persons in that Quarter also whose Claims have been rejected, who, nevertheless, may be properly considered as having an equitable Right, at least to the preemption. Previous to the issuing any Orders of Survey at Cahokia, it became necessary to decide upon a Claim, set up by the Seminary of Quebec, to a piece of Land four leagues square, granted, many years ago by the Officers then commanding in the Country for the King of France, to the Missionaries of Cahokia and Tamarois: The Bounds of this Concession embraced all the Settlements at Cahokia and the Prairie du Pont, and they had been made, generally, with the consent of the Missionaries for the time being, so long as the Mission subsisted; when it had dropped settlements (within the Bounds) had been per- mitted by military Officers both french and English—After a very careful Examination into all the Circumstances it appeared that the Mission of Cahokia & Tamarois had been dropped before the Country was ceded to Great Britain—that it had never been reestablished while it remained under the Dominion of that Power;2 and that it did not exist now; the present Curé not being a Missionary,3 but a parish Priest supported by the Inhabitants; and, that the pretentions of the Seminary of Quebec were futile and groundless:—it was therefore considered as as Tract of Land that had reverted for want of Heirs, and was by Proclamation, of which N° 10 is a Copy, reunited to the M See Cahokia court record, June 11, 1783, and Feb. 5, 1784, Alvord (ed.) Cahokia Recs. (IHC, II), 153, 159. 1 Antoine Girardin, a judicial and military official in Cahokia prior to the terri- torial period; see ibid., p. 632, and Journal Exec. Procs., June 1,1790, post, ill, 307. Warrants for the survey of the District of Cahokia are printed ante, pp. 263 et seq. 2 The documentary sources are found in Alvord (ed.), Cahokia Recs. (IHC,II), 497-509; Alvord and Carter (eds.), Critical Period (IHC, X), 45-49; id.. New Regime (IHC, XI), 521-539, 558-569; id., Trade and Politics (IHC, xvI), 300-314, 400-422, 529-539, 548-561, 579-584, 608-628; Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 532-533, 554-602. s Father de St. Pierre; for notice of, see Alvord (ed.), op. cit., pp. xxxvi, 531, 533.
Page 328
328 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Domain of the united States; and the Inhabitants were put upon the same foot as the other ancient Settlers.4—The Survey, mentioned in the Proclamation to have been ordered, was not made because, it afterwards came out that the King of France had disaproved of the Grant and resumed the Soil. N° 11 is the deposition of Joseph la Bussiere5 the Notary who published the Edict of the french King respecting it;8 and N° 12 a Remonstrance of the Inhabitants respect- ing a Sale that had been made of a part of it, by an Attorney for the Seminary of Quebec.7—N° 13 the Letter from the Superior of that Seminary mentioned in the Proclamation.8 No Returns of Survey from Cahokia are as yet come to hand and it is probable that not many have been made, as the same Objections to paying for them were raised here as elsewhere, and the Inhabitants of that Place are joined in the Remonstrances which have been made by those of the other Villages. It was not possible to establish the Courts of Justice, nor the Militia, in the County of Sl Clair, until Cahokia had been visited, and then it was difficult to establish them conformably to the Law; and no Alter- ation in the Law could take Platte at that time because the Judges, who form a part of the Legislature, were not present.—The Difficulty arose from these circumstances; The Villages and Settlements were at a great distance from each other;—not any of them were sufficiently peopled to admit of being made a distinct County—the whole afforded barely a sufficient number of Persons who were, in any degree, quali- fied to fill the necessary Offices;—Justice could not have been adminis- tered had the Sessions of the Courts been confined to any one Place, even the most central; for, besides the distance, there was considerable danger in passing and repassing;—under these circumstances no Per- son would have been found who would have taken upon himself the office of a Magistrate; neither could the attendance of Juries have been compelled, and the greatest confusion must have ensued;—The Judges of the Judges9 of the County Court of common Pleas were by Law limited to five and not less than three:—The Expedient therefore of dividing the County into three districts was fallen upon, tho not stricly warranted by Law, and the Judges so distributed as to make the holding of that Court practicable; and it was ordained that a 4 Apr. 22,1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 297. * Joseph Labuxiere, sr., became notary-clerk in the Illinois country in 1757, serving the French Government in that capacity until 1765, when he removed to St. Louis. He returned to Kaskaskia in 1781 and was appointed state's attor- ney and clerk. On account of the civil disorders in the latter place, he re- moved to Cahokia, where he died in 1791 (Alvord, ed., CahokiaRecs., IHC, n, 625). • May 29, 1790, ante, p. 261. 7 Ante, p. 249. »Aug. 6, 1789, ante, p. 201. 9 As in the original.
Page 329
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 329 Session of that Court, of the General Sessions of the Peace, and of the Probate, should be held in each district, but all as Sessions of the same Courts respectively, and the Prothonotary of the Common Pleas, the Clerk of the Peace and the Judge of Probate were directed to appoint deputies and open Offices in each District: The Proclama- tion for this Measure has been transmitted by the Secretary of the Territory and is in the Office of the Secretary of State10—The Meas- ure has since received the Sanction of the Legislature.11 By the Ordinance for the Government of the Territory the Laws and Customs which had prevailed among the ancient Settlers are to be continued so far as respects the Descent and Conveyance of real prop- erty 12—the mode of conveyance was an Act before a Notary, and filed in his Office, of which an attested Copy was delivered to the Party—to fulfil that part of the Ordinance it was necessary that Notaries public should be appointed, and one was commissioned at Kaskaskia,13 one at the Prairie du Rocher,14 and one at Cahokia.15— The Inhabitants of the County were also formed into a Regiment of Militia and Commis- sions issued for a Lieutenant Colonel and all the subordinate Officers.11' The Donations to the ancient Settlers have not been laid out be- cause, at Kaskaskia and the Prairie du Rocher no Person could be found to do it—At Cahokia an Authority was given to Mr Girardin for that purpose;17 but nothing, I presume, has been done in consequence of it, for the Alteration that was made in the location of these Dona- tions by the Act of the 29th of August,18 from the west to the east side of the Hills or ridge of Rocks, throws them at such a distance from their present possessions, (the Hills being of a considerable breadth and not very fit for Cultivation) that, in the existing Circumstances of the Country, they could not possibly occupy them.—they humbly pray 10 Apr. 27, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post. III, 301. 11 Nov. 6, 1790 (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvil, 37-41). u July 13, 1787, ante, p. 40. 18 Louis Pierre Frangois Carbonneaux was appointed notary public at Kaskaskia June 10,1790 (Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 310). He acted as notary in Illinois during the British period, and was elected clerk of the court at Kaskaskia during the regime of Virginia. When Governor St. Clair reached Kaskaskia in 1790, Carbon- neaux was acting as clerk and notary and delivered the archives to the new govern- ment (Alvord, ed., Kask. Recs., IHC, v, 6). "There is no record of this appointment in the Journal of Executive Proceed- ings. 15 Joseph Labuxiere, sr., appointed May 5, 1790 (Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 306). Apr. 29, 1790, ibid., p. 305. 17 June 1, 1790, ibid., p. 307. 18 This condition was incorporated in the resolution on George Morgan's memorial, Aug. 28,1788, ante, p. 145, and was repealed by the act of Mar. 3,1791, post, p. 341.
Page 330
330 TERRITORIAL PAPERS that the location pointed out by the Act of the 20th of June 178819 may be restored. N° 14 is a representation respecting their common— What they set forth is true both with respect to their having been long in the occupation of it, and the Quality of what they ask for upon the Hills.20 Great Numbers of People haveabandonned the Illinois Country and gone over to the spanish Territory—a claim however is still kept up by them to their ancient possessions; but it is to be remarked that very few Grants were made by the french in fee simple—When any Person quitted their possessions, the Soil seems to have reverted of course to the Domain of the King, and was regranted at the pleasure of the Officers commanding:—It is presumed that, strictly, the Posses- sions of all those who have so expatriated themselves are fallen to the united States, had they even been granted originally in fee simple, and may be disposed of as they shall see fit, but the loss of the People is severly felt; 21—may I be permitted to suggest that a Law declaring those Possessions escheated unless the former owners return and oc- cupy them within a certain time, would not be an improper Measure.22 At Kaskaskia the Jesuits held valuable Possessions; The Buildings are gone entirely to ruin, but the Lands are still of some value—On the suppression of the Order in France the Officers of the french King dis- posed of their property at that place by public Sale,23 but before the Sale took Place the Country had been ceded to Great Britain, a cir- cumstance that was not known there—the british Officer who took pos- session for that Crown considered the Sale as illegal, and laid hold of the Property;24 and the purchaser a Mr Beauvais,25 and his Descend- ants, have been kept out ever since A Son of Mr Beauvais now lays claim to it in virtue of the purchase, and throws himself upon the united States to be confirmed in what yet remains of the property for which his Father paid a very large Sum of Money.28 The Commerce of the Illinois Country is of some importance in itself, but more so when considered as connected with the Spanish "By the act of Mar. 3, 1791, this resolution was substituted for that of Aug. 29, 1788. 20 Apr. 28, 1790, ante, p. 241. 21 For an explanation of the problem incident to the confusion of land grants under France, Great Britain, Virginia, and the United States, see Philbrick (ed.), Laws Ind. Terr. (IHC, xxI), lx-c. 22 See act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 340. 23 Relevant documents concerning the banishment of the Jesuits and the sale of their property in the Illinois country are in Alvord and Carter (eds.), Critical Period (IHC, x), 62-133; id., New Regime (IHC, XI), 126, 323, 326-328. * Id., New Regime (IHC, Xi), 126; Carter (ed.), Corr. Gen. Gage, i, 94. a Jean Baptiste Bauvais (Beauvais), Nov. 6,1763; see Alvord and Carter (eds.), Critical Period (IHC, x), 127. For an account of the Bauvais family, see Alvord (ed.), Kask. Recs. (IHC, V), 414. 28 Confirmed by the act of Mar. 3, 1791.
Page 331
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 331 side of the Missisippi—The Villages on that side of the River having been originally settled by the french, and under the same Government as that part which is now in the possession of the united States, the connection between them is still very intimate, and favors a commer- cial intercourse, which, tho' illicit, might be carried on by the Citizens of America without risque.—it is carried on at present without risque, but is, unfortunately, almost entirely in the hands of the british—even much the greatest part of the merchandize for the trade of the Misouri River is brought from Michilimackinac by that of the Illinois, partly by the spanish Subjects themselves, and partly by british Traders.—The manner is this —The spanish Subjects either introduce them at once, in consequence of a secret convention with their Com- mandants, or they are brought down to Cahokia and landed there, and afterwards carried over to St Louis as opportunities can be found.— What is brought by the british Traders, the spanish Subjects pur- chase and pay for on the american side, taking all the risque that attends the introducing them into their own Country upon themselves. The Furs, in which these Goods are generally paid for, Deer skins answering better than Furs at the new Orleans market, are carried to Canada by the same Communication, that is to say up the Illinois River; up the Chicagoo; and from thence by a small portage into the Lake Michigan, and along that Lake to Michilimackinac; or from the Chicagoo up the River au Plein and by a portage into the same Lake. In the spring of the Year the Waters of the Michigan and the Chicagoo rise each to such a heigth that the intermediate Space is entirely over- flowed, and is passable by the Vessels in use there, which are bark Canoes, but which carry a very considerable Burthen, and are navi- gated by three or by five Persons. The Commerce of that Country is of some Importance also as an Object of revenue; for, if the Impost on Importations was extended to it some Money would be produced by it; but the principal advantage would be, that it would contribute to turn the Trade into the Channel of the united States. There is no doubt that the Furs of that Country might be brought up the Ohio River at as little, or even a less, Expense as attends the carriage of them to Cannada27—it has been tried by one Person, a Mr Vigo and found to answer; altho' the Goods he carried out were transported by Land from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh and loaded with an Impost the Competitors were free from, they came to market on better terms than those from Canada—could those also be subjected to it, a decided advantage would be given to the american Trader. There is another Communication between Canada and the Missi- sippi by the Ouisconsin River, a little above the mouth of which is the "Cf. the trade situation in the same territory during the British regime (Carter, G. B. and the III. Country, 176S-1771*, pp. 77-102).
Page 332
332 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Prairie du Chien:—At that place there was a considerable Town while the Country was in the hands of the French: It has gone to ruin; but by that Communication the british carry on all the Trade of the upper part of the Missisippi, and at the Prairie du Chien they assemble twice in every Year in great Numbers; frequently as I have been informed, to the amount of five or six hundred Persons—it would certainly be for the national honor that an Establishment that would command that Communication was made; but the great Distance, and the Dif- ficulties that might attend the supporting it, will probably prevent it at present. An Establishment at the mouth of the Illinois River would also be very useful, both with respect to the Trade of that River and of the Misouri, but its being regularly innundated once or twice a Year for- bids it; there is however an excellent situation some distance lower down, and nearly opposite to the Misouri, at a Place called Payisa,28 that would answer:—the Situation is high, the Air pure and healthy, and the Soil good, and across the Country, it is not more than three Miles distant from the Illinois River. It was the Opinion of the best informed Men I conversed with at Cahokia and from St Louis, that if a Town were laid out there, and a small military Post erected it would be peopled immediatly, and Sl Louis soon fall again into the same unimportant situation it held before the Misfortunes of the Illinois Country;29 At present however Sl Louis is the most flourishing Village of the Spaniards in the upper part of the Missisippi, and it has been greatly advanced by the People who abandonned the American side:— to that they were induced partly by the Oppression they suffered, and partly by the fear of losing their Slaves, which they had been taught to believe would be all set free on the Establishment of the american Government.—much pains had indeed been taken to inculcate that belief, (particularly by a Mr Morgan of new Jersey,) and a general desertion of the Country had like t[o have] been the Consequence.— The construction that was given to that part of the Ordinance which declares there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude was, that it did not go to the Emancipation of the Slaves they were in possession of, and had obtained under the Laws by which they had formerly been governed, but was intended simply to prevent the introduction of others.30—In this Construction I hope the intentions of Congress have not been misunderstood, and the Apprehensions of the People were quieted by it; but the circumstance that Slaves cannot be introduced, will prevent many People from returning who earnestly wish to return, both from a dislike to the spanish Government, and n Piasa, Macoupin County, Illinois. » Cf. similar recommendations during the period of British control (Carter, ed., Corr. Gen. Gage, I, 176-179, 277-281). » See ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 49, n. 34.
Page 333
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 333 that the Country itself is much less desirable than on the american side—could they be allowed to bring them back with them, all those who retired from that Cause would return to a man. There is a small Settlement up the Illinois River at the old Peoria Town. A Person of the Name of Mayet31 had been appointed Com- mandant of the Militia there by General Clarke, and had continued in that Station until my arrival—As he was found to have consider- able Influence with the Savages and had conducted himself with some degree of approbation, it was thought best to continue him, and a Commission of Captain in the Militia was given to him with the Instructions marked N° 15.32 Should it ever be thought proper to interdict the Communication with Canada by the Illinois River, there is no Place, at present in the possession of the united States, that would answer the End so well as this at the old Peoria Town:—The River is very narrow, and, the Channel lying close to the shore, every Boat is obliged to pass within small musquet shot. It did not appear proper for me to interupt that Communication at that time; for tho', on the principle of reciprocity, it would be perfectly justifiable in the united States, they should be prepared to fill up the void that would thereby be created—The Savages: the Inhabitants and the Spaniards would at once be cut off from a very necessary Commerce;—it was for that Reason that Mayet was directed to suffer Persons to pass and repass who were furnished with passports—several of the spanish Merchants applied for and obtained them, under the express Condition that they were not to attempt any trade with the Indians. This seemed to be all the hold that could then be well taken of it, and it held out the Idea that the Direction and restriction of the Commu- nication was in the contemplation of Government.—By the Ordinance for regulating Indian Affairs no Person was to be allowed to travel thro' the Indian Nations without having received the approbation of the Superintendant33—the Passports above alluded to were founded on that Clause of the Ordinance; but, by the Law lately enacted for regulating the Trade and intercourse with the Indians,34 it has not been reordained—a Doubt arises whether the Ordinance is not "Jean Baptiste Maillet settled on the site of what is now Peoria, Illinois, without authorization, about 1778 and became a prominent trader. He was regarded as commandant there and took part in expeditions against the British. His trading operations were extended as far west as the Rocky Mountains. He was killed in 1801 (Alvord, ed., Cahokia Recs., IHC, n, 230). For opinions concerning his integrity, see Sargent to the Secretary of War, July 12, 1792, post, p. 406, and Oct. 29, 1792, post, p. 413. His various appointments under American rule are listed in the index to the present volume. »» June 1,1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 309. See also ibid., June 26,1790, p. 314. « Aug. 7, 1786, ante, p. 20. * July 22, 1790, 1 Stat. 137-138.
Page 334
334 TERRITORIAL PAPERS repealed by the Law, and that consequently any Person may travel thro the Indian Nations without asking permission of any One. A contract subsists between Flint and Parker and the late Board of Treasury for a great Tract of Land in the Illinois Country.—no part of the Contract has I believe been complied with on their parts, and probably never will;35 but if if it is not attended to, before a Law passes for erecting an Office for the Sale of the Lands, it may create embarrassments hereafter. The Papers N° 16 are the Orders for erecting Prisons and an assign- ment of Lotts to build them upon36—The Lots at Cahokia had been reserved when the Town was first laid out, for public use, and to that at Kaskkaskia no Person laid Claim. N° 17 is the copy of a Procla- mation forbidding Strangers to hunt in the Territory,37 and N° 18 another to prevent the cutting and carrying away building Timber and fire Wood to the spanish side.38 They were occasioned by the Representations of the People that very great Injury was done to Individuals, and to the public, by the spanish Subjects cutting down and carrying away the Timber, while they were not allowed to bring even a Stone (which are plenty on that side and scarce on this) from that Shore; and that great Numbers of them assumed the Liberty of hunting Buffaloe for the Market of new Orleans, to the prejudice of the Citizens, who were not allowed to fire a Gun, upon any account whatever, on the spanish Side. It would have been much more proper that many of those matters, which have been attempted to be regu- lated by Proclamation, should have been provided for by Law, but the Absence of the Judges prevented it. Having had occasion to make some Representations to the spanish Commandant at Sl Louis and Sl Genevieve, altho they are not of much importance, yet I believe it is proper to submit the Letters that passed between us; they are contained in the bundle marked N° 19.39— N° 20 is a Proclamation of the Governor of New Orleans:40 Since that, I am informed another has appeared permitting the Importation of every thing the growth of the Countries bordering upon the Missi- sippi and Ohio Rivers to that City, on the payment of fifteen per Cent ad valorem—I have not been able to obtain a Copy of it. When the two Emissions of Paper Money were called in by Con- gress, a considerable Sum of those Emissions were lodged in the Office of a Notary public at Kaskaskia, by the Direction of the Lieutenant » Oct. 22, 1787, ante, p. 77. This contract was not executed. u Ante, p. 277; see also Journal Exec. Procs., June 6, 1790, post, ill, 308. « June 10, 1790, ibid., p. 310. »• June 10, 1790, loc. eit. * Ante, pp. 231 et seq. 44 Sept. 2, 1789, allowing immigrants to enter, ante, p. 213.
Page 335
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 335 of the County of Illinois41—there it yet remains, and the owners have received no satisfaction for it of any kind—they complain of this, and it would seem not without reason. There is some Obscurity in that part of the Ordinance which describes the Persons who are to be considered as ancient Settlers,— the words are "who on or before the year 1783 professed themselves citizens of the united States or any of them" A Doubt arises to what part of the Year the word on refers.—does it include the whole Year, or is it confined to the first day of it? Congress may perhaps think proper to give it a determinate application.42 Among the Claims for Land that have been rejected, there are sev- eral that are founded on purchases made from Individual Indians, and the conveyances set forth that they were inherited from their parents, and were not the property of the Nation—it could not however be dis- covered that any Division of the Lands of the Kaskaskia Indians had ever taken place, among themselves, and the Chief of that Nation has applied to be confirmed in a Tract of Land of about five or six thousand Acres, where their Village was situated not long ago; and which would take in the parcels that have been sold and applied for as ahove:—On this Claim no Decision has been made—it appeared to be a Subject that ought to be referred to Congress; but I may be allowed to observe, if one Indian Sale is approved, it is probable that a great many will be brought forward.43 At the Falls of Ohio, when on the way to Kaskaskia, information was received that the Inhabitants at Post Sl Vincennes were in danger of perishing for want of Corn, their whole Crop of the last fall having been destroyed by an untimely frost. I immediatly wrote to Major Hamtramack, and requested him, if he found the Case to be as it had been represented, to send, to the Agents of the Contractors for supply- ing the Troops, for as much as would be absolutely necessary for their preservation. N° 21 is an extract from the Letter to him on the Subject.44—It appeared to be a duty incumbent upon me to preserve the Lives of the Citizens of the Territory, and I flatter myself that the Measure will meet the approbation of the Legislature. The Papers N° 2245 and 23 are lists of the Heads of Families at Cahokia and the Prairie du Pont and N° 24 is the Request of a Mr 41 County Lieut. John Todd issued two proclamations, July 27 and Aug. 22, 1779, setting forth the necessity of depositing with him the proper emissions for which he would issue certificates. Between $15,000 and $20,000 was turned in (Alvord, ed., Cahokia Recs., IHC, II, lxxi). 42 The wording was changed in the act of Mar. 3, 1791, post, p. 340. a See act of Mar. 3, 1791, loe. eit. 44 Jan. 23, 1790, ante, p. 229. 45 This and the following enclosure, no. 23, are printed ante, pp. 259, 260.
Page 336
33G TERRITORIAL PAPERS Gibaut47 for a small Piece of Land that has been in the Occupation of the Priests at Cahokia for a long time, having been assigned to them by the french; but he wishes to possess it in propriety; and it is true that he was very useful to General Clarke upon many Occasions, and has suffered very considerable Losses. I believe no Injury would be done to any One by his request being granted, but it was not for me to give away the Lands of the united States. Before I close this Report it may be necessary to mention the neces- sity there is for a printing press in the western Territory—The Laws adopted or made by the Legislature are declared to be binding upon the People until they are disaproved by Congress—There is no way of giving them any publicity but by having them read at the Courts, and but few People become thereby acquainted with them—even the Magistrates who are to carry them into Execution are strangers to them, for the Secretary does not conceive it to be his duty to furnish them with copies; indeed the Business of his Office encreases so fast that it would be impossible to do it48—besides they are in English, and the greatest part of the Inhabitants do not understand a word of it— the translation of them therefore seems to be necessary, and that a sufficient number of them should be printed in both languages, and that can only be done in the Territory where the original Rolls are deposited.—Every public Act & communication of what kind soever I was myself obliged to translate into french, and having no Person to assist me, it made the Business extremly troublesome and laborious. The Situation of Indian Affairs rendering it necessary that I should return to the Seat of Government I did by Letter resign the Govern- ment of the Territory into the hands of Mr Sargent on the [11 49] day of [June 49] and embarked for the head Quarters of General Harmar to consult with him, on my way, upon the Measures that would be necessary and practicable for the defence of the Country. Some Apology seems to be necessary for some of the Paper[s] that accompany the Report appearing in the french Language—The Orig- inals of all of them, which required publication, were published in English as well as in french—all the Communications with the Indians which were numerous had to be translated] into that Language on account of the Interpreters—as well as their Answers into English— from June until my arrival in the City I have been in constant motion either on horseback or in an open Boat where the copying of Papers was impossible, had I not been separated from them; and they did not come to hand here till very lately—in that time I was been obliged to travel above four thousand Miles,—the necessity that this Report 47 Father Pierre Gibault, May 1, 1790, enclosed in the Secretary of State to the President, Feb. 17, 1791 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 18-22); see also ante, p. 243. 48 See act respecting the government of the territories, May 8, 1792, post, p. 395. 4* Blank in the original.
Page 337
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 337 should be made before the present Session of Congress ended, seemed to forbid any further delay and will I hope excuse that impropriety. Ar Sl Clair Governor of the Territory of the united States north west of the Ohio. Postscript In the course of the last Fall a considerable number of french Emigrants have been introduced into the Territory, and on my last return from Fort Washington I found about four hundred of them at a place they have named Gallipolis, three Miles below the mouth of the great Kenhawa on the opposite side of the River. They were liv- ing in Barracks that had been provided for them by the Scioto Com- pany, but did not seem to be at all usefully employed, and were much discontented—It was not half an hour after my Landing that the Paper marked N° 2560 was put into my Hands by a Number of Per- sons deputed for the purpose N° 26 is my Answer.61 The Regulations there promised have not yet taken place from the want of proper infor- mation with respect to the Characters best fitted to fill the civil and military Offices. I had desired a list from some of the principal Per- sons themselves and one also from an Agent of the Scioto Company who resides with them, to have an Opportunity of comparing them, not chosing to rely altogether upon the recommendations of either, but they were not sent forward, and the Communication was cut off by the Ice. About one hundred more of those Emigrants are at the Muskingham, and one hundred at Buffaloe Creek in Pennsylvania, waiting the opening of the Season to establish themselves near the Scioto. Ar St Clair [Endorsed] Report of the Govr of the Territory of the United States North West of the Ohio A St Clair62 JUDGE PUTNAM TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, i:ALS] Marietta February 28th 1791 SiR Sence the affair of the 2d of January.63 Several Wyandot men & women have ben in to Fort Harmer to Trade, they approched with Shyness and in truth our people ware at a loss how to treat them, but M Not found. See petition of Dec. 22, 1792, p ost, p. 422. 11 Nov. 21, 1790, ante, p. 311. a For other extended reports from Governor St. Clair, covering the same ground, see those of [January], 1796, and Jan. 7, 1799, post, p. 542, and ill, 3. u The "Big Bottom" massacre; for account of, see Putnam to the Secretary of War, Jan. 6, 1791, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 247-249; see also ibid., pp. 112-113. 126850—J4 23
Page 338
338 TERRITORIAL PAPERS on the whole it was thought best, and they ware recived & treated in the Same frindly maner as heretofore: althoe Sculking parties ware at the Same time discovered houvering round Some of our Settlements; M the accounts these indians give of the affair at the Big-Bottom, are various—the first reported thet they Saw their Trail on their return & that by mar[ks] they left on certain trees they ware 76 in number & had 20 Scalps—the next account was from one Gevoto a Wyandot man who Said he was told by a man who Saw them, that they consisted of about 30 and that they had Some prisoners as well as Scalps—that they came from a Village on the Tawa river—and another account we have from a Wyandot who Said he Saw the party on their return neer Sandusky, that they ware chiefly Mingos consisted of abut 30 and had 5 prisoners:—the Indians who have ben in, all agree that a great many Indians are going to war, but pretend that the Wyndots & Dellawares are not, and that we must expect a great many here in a few weeks—about ten days ago a Soldier was taken within 60 rods of Fort Harmer but he had the good fortune to make his escape the first night, and the next day came in to the Settlement at Belle-prie, the Sold[ier] Sais thet he was first taken by three and carred a few miles when they came to 4 others, that one of them Spake good English and was very perticuler in his enquierris respecting the number of men at Fort Harmer, Marietta, & Belle-prie the night after the Soldier got into Belle-prie, a party of Indians (Supposed to be the Same who took the Soldier) brook open a number of Deserted houses in the lower part of Belle-prie Settlement, but they did no damage to any of the property except killing one Sheep and two fat hogs a part of which they took of—Our people have nearely compleatd their works of Defence, and I have no great apprehentions for the imediate Saifty of their persons but their forage, Corn & Cattle Still remain exposed as they have not ben able hatherto to remove them to places of Security— the present crisis appears to me important, not only as it respects the inhabitants of these frontiers but the united States in General—for Should Goverment take efectual measures] to bring the natives to Submission, & for the protection of those who have Settled under her authorety, She may fairly calculate on a rapid sale of her lands, by which She may Sink many millions of her National Debt—but on the Contrary Should She leve her Citizens to be insulted & murdered by the Savages, I think it dos not require the Spirit of prophecy to fore- tell the consequence. No more lands will be purchased but will prob- ably be Seized on by privit adventurers who will pay little or no reguard to the laws of the United States or the rights of the natives—It is a fact Sir, well known that imediately after the conclusion of the war in 1783 privet adventurers, in a perticuler way, located & by building "See Putnam to the Secretary of War, Mar. 8 and 14, 1791, ibid., pp. 251-254.
Page 339
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 339 Cabbens, girdling trees or planting a few hills of Corn, took posetion of all the most valuable land on the Muskingum, Hockhocking, and other rivers as well as on the ohio for Several hundred mils, Nor must it be forgot that numbers of these people ware driven off by the federal Troops at the point of the Bayonet, their houses burnt & corn de- stroyed—when therefore it Shall be known that Congress have given up the protection of the Country, what are we to expect but these people, with others of like priniples, will return like a flood & Seize the country to them Selves, and Should this be the case is it probable that the United States will ever be able to reduce them to obediance without incuring a much greater expence then the chastizeing the Indians in a proper maner & the necessary establishment] for the pro- tection of the Settlements can posiably amount [to].M all the Settlements in Virginia bordoring on the Ohio in our Neigh- bourhood are erecting defences—We here that 7 persons ware killed about two [wee]ks ago neer Short Creek the account of which probably reah you before this—Major Sargent I hear is at Fort Pitt— I have the honour to be with the highest posiable Sentements of Respect Sir your most obedient & most humble Servent Rufus Putnam The President of the united States [Addressed] His Excellency George Washington Esqr—at Philidel- phia to be lodged in the post office at Bedford, or Carslie. Free Free [Endorsed] From Rufus Putnam Esqr 28th Feby 1791. LAND GRANT TO THE INHABITANTS OF VINCENNES AND THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [SD: Original Statutes 56] [March 3, 1791] An Act for granting lands to the inhabitants and settlers at Vincennes and the Illinois country, in the Territory north-west of the Ohio, and for confirming them in their possessions." Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That four hundred acres of "See statement of causes by the Secretary of War, Jan. 26, 1792, post, p. 359, and instructions to Col. Thomas Procter, Mar. 11, 1791, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 145-146. 54 Printed also in 1 Stat. 221-222, with numerous variations from the original. "The law was based largely on the recommendations of Governor St. Clair and Secretary Sargent: St. Clair to the Secretary of State, Feb. 2 and 10, 1791, with accompanying documents, ante, p. 322; report of Sargent to the President, July 31, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 323; the Secretary of State to the President, Dec. 14, 1790, ante, p. 315; report of the Secretary of State, Feb. 17,1791 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, 1, 18-22). See also Annals, 3 Cong., 2 sess., 1741, 1744, 1745, 1776, 1777, 1861, 1975.
Page 340
340 TERRITORIAL PAPERS land be given to each of those persons, who in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty three, were heads of families at Vincennes or in the Illinois country, on the Missisippi, and who since that time have removed from one of the said places to the other.68 And the Governor of the Territory north-west of the Ohio is hereby directed, to cause the same to be laid out for them, at their own expense, either at Vincennes59 or in the Illinois country, as they shall severally elect. And be it further enacted and declared, That the heads of families at Vincennes or in the Illinois country in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty three, who afterwards removed without the limits of the said Territory, are notwithstanding, entitled to the donation of four hundred acres of land made by the Resolve of Congress of the twenty ninth of August one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight,60 and the Governor of the said Territory upon application to him for that purpose is hereby directed to cause the same to be laid out for such heads of families or their Heirs, and shall also cause to be laid off and confirmed to such persons the several tracts of land which they may have possessed and which before the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty three may have been allotted to them accord- ing to the laws and usages of the government under which they had respectively settled.61 Provided nevertheless that if such persons or their Heirs do not return and occupy the said lands within five years such lands shall be considered as forfeited to the United States.62 And be it further enacted, That one hundred and fifty acres of land, heretofore in possession of the Piankeshaw Indians, and now under actual improvement, and constituting a part of the Village of Vin- cennes be given to the persons who are severally in possession of the said land.63 And be it further enacted, That where lands have been actually im- proved and cultivated at Vincennes or in the Illinois country, under a supposed grant of the same, by any Commandant or Court claiming authority to make such grant—The Governor of the said Territory be, and he hereby is empowered to confirm to the persons who made such improvements, their heirs or assigns, the lands supposed to have been granted as aforesaid, or such parts thereof as he, in his discretion, may M See resolution of Congress, Aug. 29, 1788, ante, pp. 145. ■ The act of Feb. 21, 1793 (1 Stat. 318), repealed the provision relating to Vincennes. w This should refer to the resolve of June 20, 1788. See the Attorney General to the Secretary of State, Dec. 29, 1801, Hall (ed.), Opinions Atts. Gen., I, 95-99. "See Sargent to the Secretary of State, Jan. 3, 1794, post, p. 472. ■ That is, within five years after the passage of this act. See the Attorney General to the Secretary of State, Mar. 14, 1803, Hall (ed.), Opinions AOs. Gen., I, 124-127. 83 See Sargent to the President, July 31, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 325.
Page 341
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 341 judge reasonable, not exceeding to any one person, four hundred acres.64 And be it further enacted, That a tract of land containing about five thousand four hundred acres, which for many years has been fenced and used by the inhabitants of Vincennes as a common, also a tract of land including the Villages of Cohos66 and Prairie du Pont, and heretofore used by the inhabitants of the said Villages as a common be, and the same are hereby appropriated to the use of the inhabitants of Vincennes and of the said Villages respectively to be used by them as a Common until otherwise disposed of by law. And be it further enacted, That the Governor of the said Territory be authorized, to make a grant of land not exceeding one hundred acres, to each person who hath not obtained any donation of land from the United States, and who, on the first day of August one thousand seven hundred and ninety, was enrolled in the Militia at Vincennes or in the Illinois country, and has done Militia duty the said land to be laid out at the expense of the grantees, and in such form and place as the said Governor shall direct.06 Provided nevertheless that no claim founded upon purchase or otherwise, shall be admitted within a tract of land heretofore occupied by the Kaskaskia nation of Indians and including their Village which is hereby appropriated to the use of the said Indians. And be it further enacted, that two lots of land heretofore in the occupation of the Priests at Cahokia and situated near that Village be and the same is hereby granted in fee, to P. Gibault67 and that a tract of Land at Kaskaskia formerly occupied by the Jesuits be laid off and confirmed to St Jam Beouvais who claims the same in virtue of a purchase thereof.68 And be it further enacted, That so much of the Act of Congress of the twenty eighth of August one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight69 as refers to the locations of certain tracts of land directed to M Lands had been granted to settlers by the courts and officers under the French, British, and Virginian regimes, and similarly during the interregnum. See St. Clair to the President,"Feb. 10, 1791, ante, p. 324, and to the Senate, Jan. 7, 1799, post, in, 4; Sargent to the Secretary of State, Jan. 3, 1794, post, p. 472; the Attor- ney General to the Secretary of State, Mar. 25, 1794, post, p. 477; petitions of inhabitants, Feb. 20,1797, post, p. 590, and Aug. 7,1797, post, p. 620. For a subse- quent interpretation of the second and fourth paragraphs, see the Secretary of the Treasury to the register at Kaskaskia, May 23,1810, Gen. Pub. Acts,. . . Opinions Atts. Gen. . . . Land Laws (Gales & Seaton, 1838), n, 702-704. M See memorial of G. Abuniere et al., of Cahokia, Apr. 28, 1790, ante, p. 241. m Based on recommendation, ibid.; see also Baird to Sargent, Feb. 18, 1792, Sargent Papers (MHS). See petition for land by Father Gibault, May 1, 1790, ante, p. 243. M Jean Baptiste Bauvais, ante, p. 330. "As part of a resolution concerning the proposed contract with George Morgan, ante, p. 144.
Page 342
342 TERRITORIAL PAPERS be run out and reserved for donations to the ancient settlers in the Illinois country be and the same is hereby repealed, and the Governor of the said Territory is directed to lay out the same agreeably to the Act of Congress of the twentieth of June one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight.70 Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg Speaker of the House of Representatives. John Adams, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate. Approved March the third 1791 G° Washington— President of the United States I do certify that this Act did originate in the Senate, Attest, Sam. A. Otis Secretary WILLIAM JACKSON TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD: Correspondence, 1789-1791 :C] Georgetown, Maryland, March 29.1791. Sir, The enclosed papers,71 from the Secretary of the Western Territory, were received by the President of the United States at this place last evening; his engagements with the Commissioners not per- mitting him to peruse them during his stay here, he commands me to transmit them to you for your consideration, and he requests, if you should think it necessary that they may be reported on. W. Jackson GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO JUDGE SYMMES [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C71*] Fort Washington May 23d 1791 Sir By the Instructions from the Secretary of the Treasury of the united States to Mr Ludlow72 for laying out the Land, distinguished 70 Ante, p. 112; see also St. Clair to the Secretary of State, Feb. 10, 1791, ante, p. 329, January, 1796, post, p. 544, and to the Senate Jan. 7, 1799, post, III, 3. 71 Journal Exec. Procs., Aug. 1-Dec. 31,1790, post, m, 329 et seq. 71* A less satisfactory copy is in SD Archives (Terr. Papers). 72 Appointed surveyor of the Miami Purchase in 1787, he went west in 1790, but due to delays in obtaining adequate military escort on account of Indian troubles did not complete his survey of part of the purchase until May, 1792. This delay partly accounts for the confusion over boundaries in the first few years. Under the treaty of Greenville he surveyed the boundary of the Indian country. He was one of the original proprietors anrf settlers of Cincinnati (Bond, ed., Corr. J. C. Symmes, p. 40).
Page 343
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 343 by the Title of the Miami purchase, I perceive that the eastern Bound- ary is to begin at a place upon the Bank of the Ohio River exactly twenty Miles distant, following the Meanders of that River, from the Mouth of the great Miami and to run from thence in a course paralell to the general Course of the said great Miami, (as the eastern Bound- ary). Lands far to the eastward of that Boundary have been settled, and, it is said, sold by You to the present occupants: I beg you, Sir, to explain this matter, for I find myself in a very disagreeable pre- dicament having been led to countenance those Settlements, as being within the Boundaries of the Lands contracted for by you with the Board of Treasury, and in some Measure to give them the Sanction of Government, when it would seem the People by whom they were made ought to have been considered as outsiders upon the Lands of the united States, and removed.73 I am told that, even the Ground on which this Fort stands has been sold.7« I received Directions, a considerable time ago to lay out the Ground which surround it to be reserved for the Use of the Garrison, but I declined doing it at the time, believing as you had represented that it would be an interfer- ence with private property, and supposing the Orders had been founded in mistakes. I now fear the mistake was mine, and that I took for granted, what I should have had evidence of—Unless you Sir, can give any satisfactory Reasons why those Orders should not be carried into Execution I shall now obey them.75 I have the Honor to be Sir Your very humble Servant Ar Sl Clair The honorable John Cleves Symmes [Endorsed] Copy to Judge Symmes May 23d 1791 JUDGE SYMMES TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I: C ™] Cincinnata, May 23d 1791 Sir I have this moment been honored by the receipt of your Excellencys Letter of this day, and have considered the contents.77 I am surprised into an Answer thereto if I do it instantly, but 1 trust Sir, your Justice will not urge a more explicit answer on my part 7» This was the beginning of an acrimonious correspondence concerning the boundaries of the purchase; Symmes finally won his contention (see act of Apr. 12, 1792, post, p. 388). It was the beginning of Symmes's active hostility to St. Clair, which continued throughout the territorial period. 74 See Symmes's reply below. ■ See acts of Apr. 12, 1792, post, p. 388, and May 5, 1792, post, p. 394. This copy is in the handwriting of St. Clair. 77 See St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, May 25, 1791, post, p. 347.
Page 344
344 TERRITORIAL PAPERS at this moment, than to inform your Excellency, that by having your permission to the papers and documents touching the Miami pur- chase which are now in my possession at North Bend. I trust with all due submission, that I shall be able to shew to your Excellency that, by my Memorial preferred to the honorable the Congress of the united States in the Year 1787;78 praying their grant to me of all the Lands lying between the great Miami and the little Miami rivers, and extending northerly to a certain boundary line therein set forth; the said Congress was pleased to indulge their petitioner in the premises: and resolved that the commissioners of the board of Treasury, thereon take order. I shall be able to shew to your Excellency, that from the Commis- sioners of the Board of Treasury, governing themselves from erroneous information of the late Geographer General Thomas Hutchins Esqr they were lead to suppose that I had embraced about two Millions of Acres in the prayer of my Memorial, on which they were ordered by Congress to form a Contract with me on the principles laid down in said Memorial: requiring therefore of me a prompt payment of up- wards of one hundred and forty thousand dollars in certificates of debts due by the united States: I agreed to undertake the said payment, and to raise the Money therefor by the sale of the same Land included in the limits specified in the said memorial. That by meeting with much opposition in new Jersey, and many discouraging things suggested to intimidate purchasers, I was not so successful as to sell enough of the land to raise the stipulated first payment for two Millions of Acres, as was represented by the Geographer general to be included within the limits drawn in my memorial; I had however the Success to sell more Land than was sufficient to raise the certificates necessary to discharge the proportion stipulated by the instalments of the contract, to be paid in the first payment, might the supposed Tract of two Millions of Acres be reduced to one Million only. These Sales were made under colour and countenance of the said contract and Scheme of Sale and settle- ment addressed by me to the Citizens of the united States and pub- lished in one thousand Pamplets; a very considerable number of which previous to the sale of one Acre of Land, were submitted to the perusal, approbation or disapprobation of the honorable Members of Congress from every State in the Union, and the Commissioners of the Board of Treasury. That among the first of these Sales, made in good faith with the privity of Congress, and the Board of Treasury, were, as might rea- sonably be expected (being on the margin of the Ohio) a great part of the Lands lying eastward of the paralel line to which your Excellency has reference. That the proceeds of Sales of these Lands were actu- ally paid forward into the Treasury of the united States previous to my »8 Aug. 29, 1787, ante, p. 70.
Page 345
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 345 making any proposal to the board of treasury for receding on my part, from the purchase of two Millions of Acres; and to adhere only to so much of the same (still retaining the whole breadth in front) as should cover one Million of Acres only. I also beg leave hereafter to shew, that at the same time that from mistaken information, the Board of Treasury were lead to believe there were two Millions of Acres included in my memorial, there was in fact many thousand Acres deficiency of one Million of Acres, tho' em- bracing all the contents from one Miami to the other in front, and ex- tending the rear thereof to the utmost northern limits set forth in my said Memorial. I also trust Sir, that I can shew to your Excellency, that by the Letters which passed between the Commissioners of the treasury Board and myself on this subject, I never did recede from the Banks of the little Miami, and that any measures which they may at that time have taken with me, or that they afterwards took with my Agents to exclude me from the Banks of that River, were not formed on the prin- ciples of my memorial with which Congress ordered their compliance. That at the time when I suggested to the Board my inability to dis- charge the Sum which they required of me as the proportion of two Millions of Acres, to be paid at the first installment, I had actually paid into the treasury, more than a sufficient Sum equivalent to one Million of Acres, which was more than I was under obligations to pay, by as much, as the proportion of the deficiency of one million of Acres, since found to be in the Tract included in the limits of my memorial. That however my Agents may have been drawn in to a compliance with the demands of the commissioners of the Treasury Board in receding from the mouth of the little Miami River and accepting on my behalf of certain boundaries set forth in what is called the second contract, yet that second contract, on the premises being surveyed by the united States will be found invalid on two principles, viz, first, That it extends north easterly such a distance into the Country as to include many thousand Acres beyond what I ever asked for in my memorial to Congress therefore these extraneous Acres cannot be the Land at all for which I pledged myself. For on every principle of Law & Equity it must be constructed, that if A. makes application to B. to grant him the Lands at C. on certain conditions, and B grants to A. the Lands at D. this must be void for departure in the grant from the tenor of the prayer of A. and only B. adhering thereto, can create no obligation on the petitioner A.—secondly, it is void I humbly conceive Sir, on other ground. I can shew to your Excellency, that altho' these Commissioners of the Board of Treasury assumed to sell to me thro' the medium of my Agents at new York a Tract of Country adjoining to, and east of the great miami River, of the breadth of twenty Miles,
Page 346
346 TERRITORIAL PAPERS laying paralell with the general course of that River; yet that it is im- possible for the united States to comply on their parts with the Letter or Spirit of the said second contract, for I shall shew to your Excellency from actual Survey, that in most places between the great and the little Miami rivers, to go at right Angles with the general course of the great Miami, a breadth of twenty miles cannot be had at a very short distance from the Ohio; and the Tract of Land between the two miami Rivers, still narrowing as you ascend them; they at length approach within eight miles and a half of each other. The Lands east of the little Miami have never been ceded by the common- wealth of Virginia to the united States, therefore the united States cannot vest in me the fee of the Lands east of the little miami and adjoining thereto as they belong to Virginia or her Citizens. And it must also be void from the deception that would arise to me from the extreme ignorance of both parties touching the Geography of the Country: For it would be absurd in the united States to grant and in me to receive, a strip of Country of so narrow dimensions, extending from the Banks of the Ohio almost to Lake Erie. Whereas by the united States adhering with me to the first contract, published with their privity throughout the united States in one thousand volumes,79 under the Sanction of which, the ground on which part of Fort Wash- ington, together with the Towns of Cincinnata and Columbia now stands, and on which more than two thousand good Citizens of the united States are now settled, and their money for the same, long since, received into the Treasury of the Union, were sold, the carrying into execution, and completion of the Miami purchase will be prac- ticable, reasonable and honorable in the united States, and uniform and easy for me; I fear Sir the second will be found utterly the reverse in every point of View. Waving all further reply to your Excellencys Letter at this time, I shall on my arrival at north Bend, enter upon a more full explanation of the premises, reciting authenticated Documents and Surveys which are in my Power, whereby I flatter myself that I shall be able to give full satisfaction in the premises, and shew to your Excellency, that the Occupants now settled to the eastward of the aforesaid proposed para- lell line are not intruders, and that they ought not to have been removed therefrom, but were entitled to receive that implicated countenance and sanction with which they have been honored by your Excellency.80 I am happy Sir, that there yet remains unsold a consid- "Jan. 1, 1788, Judge Symmes wrote an article entitled "Miami Lands for Sale" which appeared in the Brunswick Gazette and Weekly Monitor for Jan. 8 and 22, 1788, and in other newspapers (Bond, ed., Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 281-284). The article was designed to reach those who had not read his pamphlet To the Respect- able Public, which was issued at Trenton, New Jersey, Nov. 26, 1787. It has been reprinted in the Quar. Pub. Hist. and Phil. Soc. Ohio, v, 82-92. 80 See the Secretary of State to Symmes, Aug. 6, 1791, post, p. 349.
Page 347
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 347 erable Area in front of Fort Washington, together with about one third of the Ground on which the Fort stands; if this tract can be of use to the Garrison, it is as far as I am concerned entirely at the Serv- ice of your Excellency and the united States.81 I have the honor to be with great defference and respect, Your Excellencys most obedent humble Servt. signed John Cleves Symmes 82 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I:ALS] Fort Washington May 25th 1791 Sir A few days ago Mr Ludlow presented to me the Instructions83 he had received from you for compleating the Surveys of certain Tracts of Land in this Territory contracted for with the. late Board of Treas- ury and requested an Escort of Troops to enable him to comply with those Instructions—The situation of Affairs, and the present weakness of this Garrison put it out of my power to furnish him with the neces- sary Escort; but, on perusing the Instructions, to my astonishment, I found that the purchase made by Judge Symmes did not extend far- ther up the Ohio than twenty Miles from the mouth of the great Miami River. He had given out, and published indeed to the World, that he had contracted for all the Lands, to a certain distance northerly, which were contained between the little and the great Miamies as eastern and western Boundaries. On my first arrival in this part of the Ter- ritory I found the Judge here, and a number of People settled already, to whom he had sold Lands far to the eastward of the twenty Miles.— It never could have entered into my Head that any Person, much less one invested with a respectable public Character, had published a falsehood—was persisting in it, and availing himself of the pecuniary advantages flowing from it: The Settlement therefore met with all the Countenance which I could give it, which I conceived to be a duty I then owed to the adventurers and to the united States; but I see I was wrong, and find myself in a very disagreeable predicament, having cloathed many Persons with civil and military authority, whom it was more properly my duty to have removed, and so far sanctioned their intrusion on the Lands of the united States. As soon as possible after this discovery I wrote a Letter to Judge Symmes of which the enclo- 81 Cf. alteration of patent issued to Symmes et al., Sept. 30, 1794, post, p. 492; the Attorney General to the House of Representatives, May 5, 1796, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 67-68. 82 Answered July 12, 1791, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 349; see also Symmes to St. Clair, Aug. 24, 1791, St. Clair Papers (OSL). 83 Not found.
Page 348
348 TERRITORIAL PAPERS sure N° 1 is a copy84 and N° 2 his Answer85 which I received this day—. The Answer does not appear in any wise satisfactory, for it is clear that, tho' there had been a proposal for a Contract different from that entered into, it had never been more than a proposal; and he has been selling the Lands of the united States upon the little Miami, which he had not contracted for, to pay for Lands his Agents had contracted for in his name upon the great Miami. As soon as it is practicable Mr Ludlow shall be enabled to fulfill your Orders—in the mean time I am much at a loss what Course I ought to hold with those Settlers, neither do I know very well where to address myself for Directions—If it is a Business that falls within the Sphere of your Office I shall be happy to receive, and carry into execution any which you may think proper to give—-if it does not fall within your Office, may I request the favour of your friendly Advice. It seems to me that all I can do at present, and it may be proper to do it, is to pub- lish a Proclamation warning all Persons against further intrusion, and permitting the occupancy of the present Settlers until the Pleasure of Congress shall be known86—to remove those if it could be done, would be ruin to them, and they are innocent not wilful trespassers; and to revoke the Commissions that have been granted would leave them in a State of Anarchy. Excuse I entreat you the Liberty I have taken to trouble you with the Dilemma I am caught in, and believe me with every Sentiment of Respect and Esteem Sir Your very humble Servant Ar St Clair The honorable Alexander Hamilton Secretary of the Treasury. SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I: ALS] Fort Washington County of Hamilton and Territory of the U. States Northwest of the River Ohio— August 1" 1791— Sir I enclose to your Excellency a Copy from the Records of the Proceedings of the Governour of the Western Territory in the Exec- utive Department of Government for the Month of July 179187— To delay it until my next periodical Communications, which must include the whole of the present Year would be (more probably) detaining it beyond the next Sessions of Congress, when some Questions and « May 23, 1791, ante, p. 342. 86 May 23, 1791, ante, p. 343. M July 19, 1791, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 354. 87 Ibid., pp. 316 et seq.
Page 349
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 349 Applications upon the Subject of Lands in this Country may make a Reference thereto, proper and necessary— with every Sentiment of most perfect Respect I have the honour to be Your Excellency's obedient Humble Servt Winthrop Sargent The President of the United States THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [LC: Jefferson Papers :C] Philadelphia August 6th 1791. Sir Your letter of May 25th to the Secretary of the Treasury 88 with the copies it enclosed of one of May 23d to Judge Symmes89 and of his answer to you of the same day,90 having been referred to me, I have now the honor to enclose you a letter to Judge Symmes91 on the subject of the settlements made on the Lands of the united States between his upper line and the little Miami, by persons claiming titles from him, wherein I have desired from him an explanation of these proceedings. Though it is the duty and determination of the Executive to see that no encroachments be made on the public Lands, yet as the settlers in this instance appear to have acted with good faith, you will be pleased to notify them that due attention will be paid to this circumstance, and in the mean time they are not to be disturbed.92 I have the honor to be with great esteem Sir, Your most obedient and most humble Servant. Governor St Clair THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE SYMMES [SD: Amer. Letters, iv: C] Philadelphia August 6.1791. To John Cleves Symmes Esqr Sir Copies of Governor Sl Clair's letter to you of May 23.179193 and of your answer of the same day to him, having been communicated to Government, it is perceived that sundry persons claiming titles under you have taken possession of lands of the United States between the upper line of your contract and the little Miami. As it is the duty M Ante, p. 347. 89 Ante, p. 342. ■ Ante, p. 343. "Aug. 6, 1791, infra. n See Journal Exec. Procs., Sept. 15, 1791, post, ill, 357. 95 Ante, pp. 342, 343.
Page 350
350 TERRITORIAL PAPERS and determination of the Executive to see that no encroachments be made on the public lands, I am now to desire from you an explanation of these proceedings, and that it may be sent at as early a day as pos- sible, in order that your claim, if well founded, may not be prejudged in a report on the subject of the lands of the United States, which is to be laid before Congress soon after they meet in October, & that such other proceedings may be had therein as shall be thought proper.•4 I am Sir &c Th: Jefferson. TOBIAS LEAR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Misc. Letters :LPC] United States August 18th 1791. By the President's command T. Lear has the honor to transmit to the Secretary of State the official communications from the Secretary of the Territory of the United States North west of the River Ohio, from January 1" to June 30th 1791 M—which the President requests the Secretary of State to take into his consideration and if there is anything contained therein, which requires the agency or attention of the President the Secretary is requested to report it to him. Tobias Lear [Endorsed] The Secy of State Secretary to the President Augt 18th 1791 of the United States.— THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:M'isc. Letters :AL] (Reply) [August 23, 1791] The Secretary of State has had under consideration the Official Communications from the Secretary of the Territory of the united States North-West of the River Ohio, from January 1" to June 30th 1791 inclusive: and thereupon Reports to the President, that none of the said Communications appear to require any thing to be done on the part of the Government of the United States; that they contain indeed the titles of several acts passed by the territorial Legislature, but the acts themselves not being yet communicated, no opinion can be given on them. [Endorsed] The Secretary of State Augt 23d 1791 M Judge Symmes wrote to the Secretary of State on Sept. 17, 1791, but his letter has not been found. M Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 334-347.
Page 351
NOR'THWEST TERRITORY 351 TOBIAS LEAR TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [SD:Misc. Letters :AL] United States Nov* 3d 1791 By the President's command T. Lear has the honor to transmit the enclosed papers respecting Indian Affairs to the Attorney General, and to inform him that the President is of opinion, that there would be the strictest propriety in the Attorney General's giving all the aid that may be required of him in forming this business. T. L. S.p.U.S. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters :ALS] Philadelphia Nov. 8.1791. Sir I have now the honour to inclose you a report on the lands of the U. S. within the North Western and South Western territories, unclaimed either by Indians, or by citizens of these states.98 In order to make the estimate of their quantity & situation, as desired by the legislature, it appeared necessary first to delineate the Indian boundaries which circumscribe those territories, & then to pre- sent a statement of all claims of citizens within the same; from whence results the residuary unclaimed mass, whereon any land law the legis- lature may think proper to pass, may operate immediately, & without obstruction. I have not presumed to decide on the merits of the several claims, nor consequently to investigate them minutely. this will only be proper, when such of them as may be thought doubtful, if there should be any such, shall be taken up for final decision. I have the honour to be with sentiments of the most perfect respect and attachment, Sir, Your most obedient & most humble servt Th: Jefferson The President of the U. S. [Endorsed] Report of the Secretary of State on the quantity & situation of Lands belonging to the U. S. in the N. Wt & S. Wt Terri- tories. Novr 8th 1791. Terr. Papers (S. W. Terr.), IV. A version also appears in A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 23-25. The original is in the Senate files, 2 Cong., 1 sess. Economy of space in the present instance and the fact that the report in question relates to a somewhat larger extent to the Territory South of the River Ohio have deter- mined its inclusion among the papers of the latter.
Page 352
352 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Amer. Letters, iv:C] Philadelphia Novemr 10.1791. The President of the United States. Sir I have duly examined the enclosed papers relating to the pur- chase by Judge Symmes of the lands on the great Miami, and think it will be proper to lay them before the Legislature. They will thereby see the foundation of the larger claim of this purchaser mentioned in the report I have had the honor of presenting to you. And also the expediency of providing some speedy and regular mode of deciding this, and other questions of a like nature which might arise hereafter, and obstruct for a considerable time the proceedings relative to the public lands.97 I have the honor to be with the most profound respect & attachment Sir &c. Th: Jefferson. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters :AL] [November 14, 1791] The Secretary of state, to whom has been referred by the President of the United States, the Report of the proceedings in the Executive department of the North Western territory, for the month of July 1791. made by the Secretary of the said territory, thereupon Reports That the letter of July 12, 1791. therein entered,93 having been already communicated to the legislature of the United states, there is nothing else in the said Report which requires any thing to be done on the part of the President of the United States. [Endorsed] From the Secretary of State Novr 14:1791 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE SYMMES [SD:Amer. Letters, iv:C] Philadelphia Deceinr 4.1791. To John Cleves Symmes Esqr. Sir Your favor of Septemr 17." has been duly received and laid before the President. He does not conceive that the Constitution has given him any controul over the proceedings of the Judges, and there- •7 See acts of Apr. 12 and May 5, 1792, post, pp. 388, 394. m Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 349. "Not found.
Page 353
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 353 fore that his permission or refusal of absence from your district would be merely nugatory. In the report which I made to the President on the subject of the public lands, and which he laid before the Legislature, I took the liberty of suggesting the establishment of a proper judica- ture for deciding speedily all land controversies between the public and individuals,1 as yet nothing is done on the subject. I have the honor to be Sir &c. Th: Jefferson. THE ILLINOIS AND WABASH LAND COMPANIES TO THE SENATE [SF: 2 Cong., 1 sess.:DS2] [December 12, 1791] To the honorable the Senate of the United States The Memorial of the Ilinois & Ouabache Land Companies most respectfully sheweth3— That, during the years 1773 and 1775, your memorialists purchased from different Indian Tribes, aborigines and possessors of the country, lying on part of the waters of the rivers Ilinois & Ouabache, two par- cels of land, as described in the deeds now in their possession, and which, when required, are ready to be produced. That the consideration, as specified in the aforementioned deeds, was at least as valuable as any that was given on similar occasions— That the negotiation was of the most publick notoriety—That the meaning and intention of the parties were interpreted and explained by persons duly qualified, of whom his Britannick Majesty's inter- preter was one; all deposing, that they were present, either at the delivery of the bargained property to the Indians; or at the execution of the deed, as will be found authenticated by Hugh Lord Esquire, captain in the eighteenth british Regiment & then commanding in that Territory. The registry of Kaskaskais will also shew the record of the whole transaction. That further formalities (if, from the British Government, more were necessary to be obtained) were prevented by the almost im- mediate rupture with Great Britain. That the property of the Lands in question was at the time of purchase in the Natives. That however clear the claim of the Company to the whole of their purchase may be; they hesitate not to express their willingness & 1 Nov. 8, 1791, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 23-25. 2 Printed also in A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 27. A letter-press copy is in SD Ar- chives (Misc. Letters). * For the early history of the Illinois and Wabash Land Companies, see intro- duction to Alvord (ed.), /ilinois- Wabash Co. Ms. 126650-34 24
Page 354
354 TERRITORIAL PAPERS desire that a reasonable compromise upon the subject may take place between the United States & them. They therefore pray, that your honorable house may appoint a committee to hear and report upon, the justice of their case, and such proposals as they shall lay before it. This prayer they with con- fidence, hope will be complied with; both from your known love of justice & the evident advantage that must result to the community, if by a compromise with the company, the necessity of a second pur- chase from the natives wou'd be precluded. Of this but little doubt can be entertained since the Indians never have denied, and are still ready, as the company are credibly informed, to acknowledge the honesty of the purchase made from them by your memorialists.4 By Order, and on Behalf of the Company 12th Decernr 1791, James Wilson William Smith Jn° Shee Note—For report of Com" of House of Rep"—see N° 11. [Endorsed] 2d Cong: L. Sess: 1" Memorial of the Ilinois& Ouabach Land Companies Decemr 12th 1791. Order for 31" Decr 1792 Order for 14 Jany 1793.6 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: AL] [Dec. 16. 1791] Th: Jefferson presents his respects to the President, and sends a sketch of such a message as he thinks might accompany the statement from the Secretary at war. he does not know whether the President intended that an estimate of the next years operations should accom- pany it. but he thinks it a proper occasion to bring forward the prep- arations for the next year, and that it forms the safest ground for making the present communication. Dec. 16. 1791. [Endorsed] Proposed Message to Accompany a Report from the Sec of War's Statement 16th Decr 1791 4 This petition was communicated to the Senate Mar. 26, 1792, and adversely- reported on (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 27). On Apr. 3, 1792, the House reported favorably; a committee of both houses met and jointly adopted the Senate report, loe. eit. John Shee, the last surviving member of the petitioners, presented another memorial on Oct. 17, 1803, which was communicated to the House Oct. 27, ibid., pp. 160-161; the House committee reported unfavorably on this memo- rial, ibid., p. 189. Cf. Journal Exec. Procs., Oct. 28, 1797, post, ill, 490. » See memorial, Apr. 11, 1792, post, p. 387.
Page 355
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 355 DRAFT MESSAGE OF THE PRESIDENT 8 [SD:Misc. Letters :D] [December 16, 1791] Gentlemen of the—The pacific measures which were adopted for establishing peace between the U. S. & the North Western Indians, having proved ineffectual, and the military operations which thereon became necessary, tho' succesful in the first instances, being otherwise in the last as was stated to you in my communication of [blank] instant, it behoves us to look forward in time to the further protection of our Western citizens. I see no reason to doubt that operations of force must still be pur- sued. I have therefore instructed the Secretary at war to prepare, for your information, a statement of the transactions of his department material to this object. these are now laid before you. while they serve to shew that the plan which was adopted for employing the pub- lic force & wealth was such as promised reasonably a more effectual issue, they will enable you also to judge of the provision which it may now be expedient to make for the ensuing year. an estimate of the Secretary at war on this subject is now laid before you. 9 Drafted by the Secretary of State and enclosed in the preceding letter.
Page 356
Blank page
Page 357
PART THREE Papers relating to the Period of the First Stage of the Government of the Territory North- west of the River Ohio 1792-1798
Page 358
Blank page
Page 359
PART THREE STATEMENT OF CAUSES OF THE INDIAN WAR [MHS: Pickering Papers: Broadside] United States, January the lGth, 1792.1 Sir, AS the circumstances which have engaged the United States in the present Indian War may some of them be out of the public recollection, and others perhaps be unknown, it may appear advisable that you prepare and publish, from authentic documents, a statement of those circumstances, as well as of the measures which have been taken, from time to time, for the re-establishment of peace and friendship. When the Community are called upon for considerable exertions to relieve a part which is suffering under the hand of an enemy, it is desirable to manifest that due pains have been taken by those en- trusted with the administration of their affairs to avoid the evil. (Signed) G. Washington. The Secretary for the Department of War. [January 26, 1792] The Causes of the existing Hostilities between the UNITED STATES, and certain Tribes oj INDIANS North-West of the OHIO, stated and explained from official and authentic Documents, and published in obedience to the orders of the President of the United States.2 A RECURRENCE to the Journals of the United States in Con- gress assembled, of the early stages of the late war, will evince the public solicitude to preserve peace with the Indian tribes, and to prevent their engaging in a contest in which they were no wise interested. But although partial treaties or conventions were formed with some of the northern and western tribes, in the years 1775 and 1776;8 1 The date of the covering letter, as printed in the broadside, is identical with that of the draft (Washington Papers); for reasons not explained the President antedated his letter, which closely follows Jefferson's draft, printed in P. L. Ford (ed.), Writings Jefferson, v, 430-431. The draft was also submitted to the Secretary of the Treasury, ibid., p. 430. 2 This is a revised and amplified statement which the Secretary of War had previously prepared for submission to Congress. Cf. A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 197-198. » See treaty at Albany, August, 1776, Docs. rel. Col. Hist. State N. Y., VIII, 605. 359
Page 360
360 TERRITORIAL PAPERS yet those treaties were too feeble to resist the powerful impulses of a contrary nature, arising from a combination of circumstances at that time; and accordingly all the various Indian nations (the Oneidas, Tuscaroras, and a few individuals of the Delawares excepted) lying on our frontiers, from Georgia to Canada, armed against us. It is yet too recent to have been forgotten, that great numbers of inoffensive men, women and children, fell a sacrifice to the barbarous warfare practised by the Indians, and that many others were dragged into a deplorable captivity. Notwithstanding that these aggressions were entirely unprovoked, yet as soon as the war ceased with Great-Britain, the United States, instead of indulging any resentments against the Indian nations, sought only how to establish a liberal peace with all the tribes through- out their limits. Early measures were accordingly taken for this purpose. A treaty was held, and a peace concluded, in the year 1784, with the hostile part of the northern Indians, or Six Nations, at Fort Stanwix. In January 1785, another treaty was formed with part of the western tribes, at Fort M'Intosh, on the Ohio; to wit, with the Wyandots, Delawares, Ottawas and Chippewas. During the same year, treaties were formed at Hopewell on the Keowee, with all the powerful tribes of the south, excepting the Creeks; to wit, the Cherokees, the Choctaws and Chickasaws.4 In January 1786, a treaty was formed with the Shawanese, at the confluence of the Great Miami with the Ohio. It was not long before certain turbulent and malignant characters, residing among some of the northern and western tribes, which had formed the treaties of Fort Stanwix and Fort M'Intosh, excited uneasiness and complaints against those treaties. In consequence of representations upon this subject, on the 5th of October 1787, Congress directed, "That a general treaty should be held with the tribes of Indians within the limits of the United States, inhabiting the country north- west of the Ohio and about Lake Erie, as soon after the first of April next as conveniently might be, and at such place and at such par- ticular time as the Governor of the Western Territory should appoint, for the purpose of knowing the causes of uneasiness among the said tribes, and hearing their complaints; of regulating trade, and amicably settling all affairs concerning lands and boundaries between them and the United States." 6 On the 2d day of July, 1788, Congress appropriated "the sum of twenty thousand dollars, in addition to fourteen thou- 4 Nov. 28, 1785, Jan. 3 and 6, 1786; see Kappler (ed.), Treaties, II, 6-12. • Journals Amer. Cong., iv, 786-787.
Page 361
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 361 sand dollars before appropriated, for defraying the expences of the treaties which had been ordered, or which might be ordered to be held in the then present year with the several Indian tribes in the Northern Department, and for extinguishing the Indian claims; the whole of the said twenty thousand dollars, together with six thousand dollars of the said fourteen thousand dollars, to be applied solely to the purpose of extinguishing Indian claims to the lands they had already ceded to the United States, by obtaining regular conveyances for the same, and for extending a purchase beyond the limits theretofore fixed by treaty; but that no part of the said sum should be applied for any purpose other than those above mentioned."9 Accordingly new treaties were held at Fort Harmar the latter part of the year 1788, and concluded on the 9th day of January, 1789, with a representation of all the Six or Northern Nations, the Mohawks excepted 7—and with a representation of the following tribes, to wit: the Wyandots, the Delawares, Ottawas, Chippawas, Pattiwatamas, and Sacs.8—By these treaties, nearly the same boundaries were recognized and established by a principle of purchase, as had been stipulated by the former treaties of Fort Stanwix and Fort M'Intosh. Thus careful and attentive was the Government of the United States to settle a boundary with the Indians on the basis of fair treaty, to obviate the dissatisfactions which had been excited, and to establish its claim to the lands relinquished on the principle of equi- table purchase. It does not appear that the right of the Northern and Western Indians, who formed the several before mentioned treaties to the lands thereby relinquished to the United States, has been questioned by any other tribes; nor does it appear that the present war has been occasioned by any dispute relatively to the boundaries established by the said treaties. But on the contrary it appears, that the unprovoked aggressions of the Miami and Wabash Indians upon Kentucky and other parts of the frontiers, together with their associates, a banditti, formed of Shawanese and outcast Cherokees, amounting in all to about one thousand two hundred men, are solely the causes of the war. Hence it is proper that their conduct should be more particularly adverted to. In the year 1784, when messages were sent to the Wyandots and Delawares, inviting them to meet the Commissioners, first at Cayahoga, and afterwards at Fort M'Intosh, their neighbours the Miami Indians were also included in the said invitations; but they did not attend. 1 Ibid., p. 828; see also instructions to St. Clair of the same date, ante, p. 117. 7 Ante, p. 182. See also ante, p. 183, n. 84. 'Ante, p. 174.
Page 362
362 TERRITORIAL PAPERS In the year 1785 these invitations were repeated; but the messengers upon their arrival at the Miami village, had their horses stolen, were otherwise treated with insolence, and prevented fulfilling their mission. In the years 1787 and 1788, new endeavors were used to bring those Indians to treat: they were urged to be present at the treaty appointed to be held at Fort Harmar; but these endeavors proved as fruitless as all the former. "At the council of the tribes, convened in 1788, at the Miami river, the Miami and Wabash Indians were pressed to repair to the treaty with great earnestness by the chiefs of the Wyandots and Delawares: the Wyandot chiefs particularly presented them with a large belt of wampum, holding one end of it themselves, and offering the other to the hostile Indians, which was refused. The Wyandots then laid it on the shoulders of a principal chief, recommending to him to be at peace with the Americans; but without making any answer, he leaned himself and let it fall to the ground: this so displeased the Wyandots, that they immediately left the council house." 9 In the mean time the frontier settlements were disquieted by frequent depredations and murders, and the complaints of their inhabitants, (as might be expected) of the pacific forbearance of the government, were loud, repeated, and distressing—their calls for protection incessant—till at length they appeared determined by their own efforts to endeavor to retaliate the injuries they were continually receiving, and which had become intolerable. In this state of things it was indispensible for the Government to make some decisive exertion for the peace and security of the frontier. But notwithstanding the ill success of former experiments, and the invincible spirit of animosity which had appeared in certain tribes, and which was of a nature to justify a persuasion that no impression could be made upon them by pacific expedients, it was still deemed adviseable to make one more essay. Accordingly in April 1790, Anthony Gamelin, an inhabitant of Post Vincennes, and a man of good character, was dispatched to all the tribes and villages of the Wabash river, and to the Indians of the Miami village, with a message purporting, that the United States were desirous of establishing a general peace with all the neighboring tribes of Indians, and of treating them in all respects with perfect humanity and kindness, and at the same time warning them to abstain from further depredations.10 The Indians in some of the villages on the lower part of the Wabash, appeared to listen to him, others manifested a different disposition, • St. Clair to the Secretary at War, Nov. 4, 1788, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 95-96. 10 See Gamelin's journal, Apr. 5-May 5, 1790, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 93-94; St. Clair to the Secretary of War, Aug. 23, 1790, ibid., pp. 92-93.
Page 363
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 363 others confessed their inability to restrain their young warriors, and all referred the messenger to the Indians at the Miami village. At that village some appeared well disposed, but the chiefs of the Shaw- anese returned the messages and belts, informing the messenger however, that they would, after consultation, within thirty nights, send an answer to Post Vincennes—The promised answer was never received. While the messenger was at the Miami village, two negroes were brought in from our settlements, prisoners; and upon his return to L'Anguille,11 a chief informed him that a party of seventy warriors, from the more distant Indians, had arrived, and were gone against the settlements. In three days after his departure from the Miami village, a prisoner was there burnt to death. Similar cruelties were exercised at the Ouittanon towns, about the same time; and in the course of the three months immediately after the last mentioned invitation, upwards of one hundred persons were killed, wounded, and taken prisoners upon the Ohio, and in the district of Kentucky. It is to be remarked, that previously to the last invitation, the people of Kentucky who, in consequence of their injuries, were medi- tating a blow against the hostile Indians (as before intimated) were restrained by the President of the United States, from crossing the Ohio, until the effect of the friendly overture intended to be made should be known.12 It is also to be observed, that the Wyandots and Delawares, after having frequently and fruitlessly endeavored to influence the Miami and Wabash Indians to peace; upon mature conviction finally declared that force only could effect the object. As an evidence that the conduct of the hostile Indians has been occasioned by other motives than a claim relatively to boundaries— it is to be observed, that their depredations have been principally upon the district of Kentucky, and the counties of Virginia, lying along the south side of the Ohio, a country to which they have no claim. It appears by respectable evidence, that from the year 1783, until the month of October, 1790, the time the United States commenced offensive operations against the said Indians, that on the Ohio, and the frontiers on the south side thereof, they killed, wounded and took prisoners, about one thousand five hundred men, women and children; besides carrying off upwards of two thousand horses, and other property to the amount of fifty thousand dollars. The particulars of the barbarities exercised upon many of their prisoners, of different ages and sexes, although supported by indispu- table evidence, are of too shocking a nature to be presented to the pub- 11 The Eel River, which enters the Wabash at Logansport, Indiana. » See the Secretary of War to St. Clair, Dec. 19, 1789, ante, p. 224.
Page 364
364 TERRITORIAL PAPERS lic. It is sufficient upon this head to observe, that the tomahawk and scalping-knife have been the mildest instruments of death. That in some cases torture of by fire, and other execrable means have been used. But the outrages which were committed upon the Frontier inhabit- ants were not the only injuries that were sustained: repeated attacks upon detachments of the troops of the United States were, at different times, made. The following from its peculiar enormity deserves recital.—In April, 1790, Major Doughty was ordered to the friendly Chickasaws on public business. He performed this duty in a boat, having with him Ensign Sedam, and a party of fifteen men. While ascending the Tenessee river, he was met by a party of forty Indians in four canoes, consisting principally of the aforesaid banditti of Shawanese, and outcast Cherokees. They approached under a white flag, the well known emblem of peace. They came on board the Major's boat, received his presents, continued with him nearly one hour, and then departed in the most friendly manner. But, they had scarcely cleared his oars, before they poured in a fire upon his crew, which was returned as soon as circumstances would permit, and a most unequal combat was sustained for several hours, when they abandoned their design, but not until they had killed and wounded eleven out of fifteen of the boat's crew.13 This perfidious conduct, in any age, would have demanded exemplary punishment. All overtures of peace failing, and the depredations still continuing, an attempt at coercion became indispensible. Accordingly the expe- dition under Brigadier General Harmar, in the month of October, 1790, was directed. The event is known." After this expedition the Governor of the Western Territory, in order that nothing might be omitted, to effect a peace without further conflict, did, on his arrival at Fort Harmar, in December, 1790, send through the Wyandots and Delawares conciliatory messages to the Miamies, but still without effect. The Cornplanter, a war Chief of the Senekas and other Indians of the same tribe, being in Philadelphia in the month of February, 1791, were engaged to undertake to impress the hostile Indians with the consequences of their persisting in hostilities, and also of the justice and moderation of the United States.15 In pursuance of this design Col. Procter, on the fourteenth of March, was sent to the Cornplanter to hasten his departure, and to 13 See memorandum from the Secretary of War to the President, May 27, 1790, Washington Papers (LC), and the President to the Secretary of War, Aug. 13, 1790, ante, p. 299. "See St. Clair to Sargent, July 15,1790, ante, p. 287. 15 A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 139-145, contains the sources relating to the negotia- tions.
Page 365
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 365 accompany him to the Miami village—and messages were sent to the Indians declaratory of the pacific sentiments of the United States towards them. But both Col. Procter and the Cornplanter, although zealously desirous of executing their mission, encountered difficulties of a particular nature, which were insurmountable, and prevented the execution of their orders.16 Major General St. Clair, in the month of April, sent messages from Fort Harmar to the Delawares, expressive of the pacific designs of the United States, to all the Indian tribes.17 A treaty was held at the Painted-Post by Colonel Pickering, in June, 1791, with a part of the Six Nations, at which the humane intentions of the General Government toward them particularly, and the Indian tribes generally, were fully explained.18 Captain Hendricks, a respectable Indian residing with the Oneidas, appearing zealously disposed to attempt convincing the hostile Indians of their mistaken conduct, was accordingly sent for that purpose, but was frustrated by unforseen obstacles, in his laudable attempts. The different measures which have been recited must evince, that notwithstanding the highly culpable conduct of the Indians in ques- tion, the government of the United States, uninfluenced by resent- ment, or any false principles which might arise from a consciousness of superiority, adopted every proper expedient to terminate the Indian hostilities, without having recourse to the last extremity; and, after being compelled to resort to it, has still kept steadily in view the re-establishment of peace as its primary and sole object. Were it necessary to add proofs of the pacific and humane dispo- sition of the General Government towards the Indian tribes, the treaties with the Creeks, and with the Cherokees, might be cited as demonstrative of its moderation and liberality.19 The present partial Indian war is a remnant of the late general war, continued by a number of separate banditti, who, by the incessant practice of fifteen years, seem to have formed inveterate and incurable habits of enmity against the frontier inhabitants of the United States. To obtain protection against lawless violence, was a main object for which the present government was instituted. It is, indeed, a 11 See instructions to Procter, March, 1791, together with other relevant papers, ibid., pp. 145-146. The lengthy report of Procter, July 9, 1791, at the conclusion of his mission, is printed ibid., pp. 149-162. The original report, written in a blank book in diary form, is in the Senate files, 2 Cong., 1 sess. On the inside cover is the original letter of transmittal of July 9. Other papers concerning Indian affairs in 1791 are found in A.S.P., op. cit., pp. 139-149, 162-202. 17 Apr. 20, 1791, Mich. Hist. Colls. xxiv, 209-211. A similar message was sent to Half King by St. Clair, Mar. 8, 1791 (A.S.P., op. eit., p. 147). "See instructions to Pickering, May 2, 1791, and relevant documents, A.S.P., op. cit , pp. 165-171. No general treaty was made with the Six Nations at this time. » 7 Stat. 35-43.
Page 366
366 TERRITORIAL PAPERS main object of all government. A frontier citizen possesses as strong claims to protection as any other citizen. The frontiers are the vul- nerable parts of every country; and the obligation of the government of the United States, to afford the requisite protection, cannot be less sacred in reference to the inhabitants of their Western, than to those of their Atlantic Frontier. It will appear from a candid review of this subject, that the General Government could no longer abstain from attempting to punish the hostile Indians. The ill success of the attempts for this purpose, is entirely uncon- nected with the justice or policy of the measure. A perseverance in exertions to make the refractory Indians at last sensible, that they cannot continue their enormous outrages with impunity, appears to be as indispensible, in the existing posture of things, as it will be adviseable, whenever they shall manifest symptoms of a more ami- cable disposition, to convince them, by decisive proofs, that nothing is so much desired by the United States as to be at liberty to treat them with kindness and beneficence.20 H. Knox, Secretary of War. War Department, Jan. 26, 1792. Philadelphia, Printed by D. C. Claypoole. SENATOR BENJAMIN HAWKINS21 TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers: ALS] Senate Chamber 10 Feby 1792 Sir, Prompted by the free and candid manner you expressed your- self on political affairs to me some days past, I shall without reserve, communicate to you the reasons which induced me yesterday to vote for striking out the second section in the bill which I enclose to you.22— That I may be understood throughout I must take a retrospect on indian affairs for some years back. During the war we acknowledged the Indians as brothers, told them of our difficulties, and embarrass- ments arising from our contest with Great-Britain, assured them of our disposition tho' unable, to furnish them such comforts as they had been accustomed to receive, urged them to be patient and declared that when success crowned our efforts, they should be partakers of * Cf. report of Dec. 29, 1794, A.S.P., op. cit., pp. 543-544. "Hawkins negotiated treaties with the Creek and Cherokee Indians in 1785; served in the U. S. Senate from North Carolina, 1789-1795; and was appointed superintendent of Indians south of the Ohio River (Diet. Amer. Biog. vm, 413- 414, art. by R. P. Brooks). 22 The bill making further and more effectual provision for the protection of the frontiers of the United States (Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 80-82,83; 1 Stat. 241-243).
Page 367
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 367 our good fortune: They were then acknowledged to be possessors of the soil on which they lived. At the close of the war, being anxiously desirous of paying to our officers and soldiers, as much of their well earned dues, as was appar- ently within the view of the government, we seem to have forgotten altogether the rights of the Indians. They were treated as tenants at will, we seized on their lands and made a division of the same as possessing allodial right, alloted certain portions to the indians for hunting grounds, and did not even think of offering them compen- sation for any claims they might pretend to have to those reserved for other purposes of the government. This doctrine it might be expected would be disliked by the independent Tribes. It was so, and was complained of by them. It is the source of their hostility. However, we persevered in this doctrine, till the treaty at Fort Harmar in 1788.23 At that period the government pursued different measures, the boundaries were recognised and established by a principle of purchase. Some of the now hostile Indians complained of the conduct of their brethren in ceding their lands, these complaints reached the government, and Governor Sl Clair, was ordered to remedy the defects, in some future treaty. But they would not attend to his invitation and assigned as a reason that he only wanted a relinquish- ment of their claims to their lands and that they were unwilling to part with them. It was natural to expect that as from our conduct they conceived themselves deprived of what they deemed most pre- cious, that they would be in a state of hostility against us, and the more so, as the British in Canada were ready enough, to misrepresent, all our conduct, to furnish them with military stores, and for some pur- poses arising from State or commercial jealousy, to encourage them. I read at the last session of Congress the painful detail of Harmars expedition, and the measures proposed by the Secretary at War, to retrieve the honor of our military reputation and to restore peace, I acquiesced in the measures proposed, not because I thought them right, but because I was told that you approved of them, and that they would give efficacy to some pacific plans, you had in contempla- tion. General Knox told the committee of the Senate, that the President had it in view to bring about a peace by other means than coercive—. General Schuyler and some others declared they would converse freely with you, and could point out how peace could be obtained without the further effusion of blood. Since this, I know of no efforts made by the executive to induce the indians to come to an accomodation previously to the last defeat, except that of Gamelin which was a feeble one, that of Proctors the Cornplanter and one other, which failed from unforseen difficulties. I thought and still a This is as in the original, though 1789 was intended.
Page 368
368 TERRITORIAL PAPERS think the means of communicating with them are abundant, at Vincents at Kaskaskia and even in Canada, There are French, the favourites of these people, and friendly to us.—While we contemplate the going into their country, we may bid adieu to peace; their attach- ment to their native soil is such that they will part with it but with their lives. The Miami may be convenient to us, but ruin to them, to part with it, they may be circumscribed for ought I know with the western Indians and Canada, as the six nations are by their neighbours, and have no place of their own to retreat to. I shall make no remark on the defeat of the 4th of november. You are a military Judge. I will only offer as my opinion that the indians did not nor cannot exceed twelve hundred effective warriors.— As soon as the military arrangements were before the Senate I deter- mined to examine more accurately than formerly what was proper for me to do, I applied to the Secretary at War for information on two points, first whether the plan sent in was the result of your opinion, or of that of the war office. and secondly whether if it was committed, and the committee applied for your opinion, it was likely you would give it. I understood his reply to the first to be that it was the result of his reflections submited to you and by you to Congress. And as to the second he thought you would not like to give an opinion. I then determined to exercise my own. I have a great respect for the War officer but he appears to me to be anxiously desirous of having a considerable standing military force, all his views in my estimation tend to that end. He is not alone in that opinion we have some in the Senate, who say that such an establishment is necessary, nay more, indispensable to the preservation of liberty. To a disposition of this sort I attribute the feeble efforts made to purchase a peace. Those at the head of affairs to the westward were for war, all who are dependent on the department are for war, this is their harvest and the indians are to this moment wholly unacquainted with the real disposition of our government. From the best view of our situation to my understanding, I am for compleating the present establishment, adding the cavalry mentioned in the bill, and making adequate provision for such effective militia, as may be called out and enabling the Executive to employ such indians as are friendly to us, and willing to aid us. The present establishment and cavalry, brought all of them for the occasion to a point, aided by suitable militia, and the friendly indians under an officer of activity will accomplish every wish I have on the subject which I confess are not many, I am for peace, I am for the establishment of posts, not in their country but our own; As long as we attempt to go into their country, or to remain there, we shall be at war. Our Finances are unequal to the expensive establishments contemplated by some, we can with the force mentioned gain by Victory, or purchase a peace,
Page 369
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 369 We should be to blaim, to run any further risk of being insulted by the British, If they will not give up the posts, They will not quietly suffer an establishment in the neighbourhood of them, We are unable to take them, and it is, thus circumstanced, better for us to be passive for the present. I beg you to be persuaded sir, that altho I write thus freely to you, it is to you only, That I hold it unbecoming in myself, to write or speak, any thing that may lessen, the respect, due to the government and every officer of it.24 I have the honor to be, most respectfully sir, your obedient humble servt Benjamin Hawkins The President of the United States [Endorsed] From The Honh,e B. Hawkins 10th Feb. 1792 on Indian Affairs THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES [SD:Dom. Letters, V:C] Philadelphia February 22d 1792. To the Speaker of the House of Representatives Sir I have the honor to enclose you copies of the laws adopted and published by the Governor and Judges of the Territory North west of of the Ohio,25 according to the resolution of the House of Representa- tives of the United States of the 10th instant.28 The six last of these only have come to hand since the commencement of the present Gov- ernment, all those preceding the year 1790 having been received by the Congress of the former Government. Some of these acts are without date,27 and one without signature,28 which I mention to assure you that in these circumstances as well as all others, they are strictly conformable to the copies deposited in my office. I have the honor to be with the most profound esteem and respect Sir &" Th: Jefferson. See "Communication of Sentiments to Benjamin Hawkins", Ford (ed.), Writings Washington, XII, 71-73. u Ohio Stat., Chase (ed.), I, 92-114; Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xviI), 1-54. 28 Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 401. "The law regulating marriages; see Pease, op. cit., pp. 22-23. An examination of the copies in SD Archives, Terr. Papers, vol. I, reveals but one law without date. 2» The act regulating the sale of spirituous liquors, Pease, op. cit., p. 28. 126650—34 26
Page 370
370 TERRITORIAL PAPERS GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [OSL:St. Clair Papers :CM] (Private) Philadelphia, February 24th 1792 Sir, I take the liberty to inclose for your perusal the draught of a letter which I propose to address to you on the subject I had the honor to mention to you a few days ago.30 You will perceive, Sir, that the Letter is intended to be published, and it is for that Reason I have presumed to lay it before you in this manner, and I have to beg the favor that, should there be any sentiment in it, or any thing in the manner of expression that you disapprove of, you would be pleased to point it out, that it may be suppressed or altered before it be too late. I am not sure Sir of the Ground I have taken upon this occasion, but I am sure the Measure has proceeded from a delicacy of Respect, and an earnest Desire to avoid the giving you the smallest dissatisfac- tion, and to approach you in my private Character is a Liberty which you were pleased to grant me. I have the honor to be Sir Your most obedient Servant Ar Sl Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] Copy to the President of the U. S. Feby 24th 1792 THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [MHS: Knox Papers: ALS SI] Wednesday 29th Feb. 1792 Dear Sir, That General St Clair may not think his letters (enclosed) to me, have been unattended to, or slighted, I wish such an answer as will do for publication may be prepared—conformably to the sentim" which seemed to be entertained of the matter when the subject was before us the other day.32— I am always Y" G° Washington PS To say neither too much, nor too little, in the answer will be a matter of some difficulty under the existing circumstances of Gen1 Sl Clairs case.— [Addressed] General Knox Original N° 32 [Endorsed] From Gen1 Washington Feby 29th 1792 M Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 279. »° The letter referred to is that of Mar. 26,1792, post, p. 376. See the President's reply, Mar. 28, post, p. 378. "A photostat copy is in the Washington Papers (LC). "See letter of Feb. 24, supra.
Page 371
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 371 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] [February 29, 1792J The Secretary of state has had under examination the Records of Proceedings in the Executive department of the North-Western government from the 1" of Aug. to the 31" of December 1791, transmitted by the Secretary, and Reports to the President of the United States That finding nothing therein which calls for the attention or inter- ference of the President, he has deposited them among the Records in the office of the Secretary of state. Th: Jefferson Feb. 29. 1792 [Endorsed] Report of the Secy of State on the Record of the proceed- ings of the Executive departmt of Governmt in the Western Territory to Decr 31Bt 1791—Feby 29th 1792 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :LS] War-department, March 1 1792. Sir, I have the honor to submit a draft of a letter to general St Clair;33 and also, a representation from Judge Putnam relative to the situation of Marietta34—If perfectly convenient, I will wait upon you to morrow morning, relative to these subjects, and some others, relative to the appointments of officers soon to be made. I have the honor to be Sir, with the highest respect, Your most obedient servt H Knox The President of the United States. [Endorsed] The Secretary of War 1" March 1792 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters: LS "] [March 2, 1792] Th: Jefferson presents his respects to the President and returns him the letter to Gen1 St Clair.36 the only passage about which he "Mar. 28, 1792, post, p. 378. - Not found. "Printed also in P. L. Ford (ed.), Writings Jefferson, v, 440-441, from a copy in the Jefferson Papers (LC). The copy was made from memory, and does not correspond exactly with the original although the substance is the same; see ibid., p. 441. "Mar. 28, 1792, post, p. 378.
Page 372
372 TERRITORIAL PAPERS has any doubt is the following 'it does not appear by any information in my possession, that your exertions were wanting to produce a different result either in the previous preparations, or in the time of action'. Th. J never heard a statement of the matter from Gen1 St Clair himself in conversation: but he has been told by those who have, that, from his own account it appears he was so confident of not meeting an enemy, that he had not taken the proper precautions to have advice of one previous to the action, and his manner of con- ducting the action has been pretty much condemned, if these crit- icisms be just, the only question is whether the above paragraph will not be so understood as to be exposed to them? Th: J. does not pre- tend to judge of the fact, and perhaps the expression may not bear the meaning he apprehends. Mar. 2. 92. [Endorsed] From the Secy of State March 2d 1792 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES [LC: Jefferson Papers: LPC «] Philadelphia Mar. 4.1792. Sir Since the date of the letter of Feb. 22 which I had the honour of writing you,38 covering the acts of the North Western government, as called for by the Resolution of the house of representatives of Feb. 10. the Acts of the same government passed in the year 1791. have come to the hands of the President and have been deposited among the records in my office.39 supposing that these also might come within the purview of the resolution of the house, I have now the honor of inclosing you a copy of them, & of expressing the senti- ments of esteem & respect with which I am Sir Your most obedient & most humble Sert Th: Jefferson The Speaker of the House of Representatives. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :D] [March 7, 1792] Sir from the last conversation I had with you I was led to expect the honor of a Letter yesterday. I am anxious to receive it for, until »7 There is also a copy of this letter in SD Archives (Dom. Letters, vol. rV). »• Ante, p. 369. »9 See the President's secretary to the Secretary of State, Feb. 28, 1792, SD Archives (Misc. Letters).
Page 373
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 373 I do, I cannot take a final decision on the Grand Point, nor bring myself to any conclusion on the manner of managing some lesser lines, and there are Circumstances turning up every day in that sense to Increase my Anxiety. Be pleased to write to me as soon as you can [four illegible words]. I am, &° the honh1" The Secretary of War Philads March. [Endorsed] The honhl<' The Secretary of War March 7 1792 WILLIAM ST. CLAIR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:Misc. Letters :ALS] Kaskaskias 13th March 1792 Sir Agreeable to an order of a Special Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace for this County I inclose the presentment of the Grand Inquest—and have to beg your Excellency to forward the Same agreeable to the Request thereunto Anexed—I have the Honor to be Your Excellenceys most Obedient Humble Servant William Sl Clair To His Excellency the Governor of the Western Territory [Endorsed] Wm Sl Clair 13 March 1792 covering presentment of a Grand jury relative to the Judges from Terry N. W. of Ohio [Enclosure] Territory of the United States North west of the River Ohio St Clair County. 1 Special Sessions'! District of Kaskaskias} 7th March 1792 J The Grand Jury for the District County and Territory above men- tioned on their oaths present that the non attendance of the Judges of the Supreme Court in said Territory agreeable to law since the Ordinance of one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven for the Government of said Territory is a Very great Grievance to its Citezens. It is the Request of this Grand Jury that the Worshipful the Court forward this presentment to His Excellencey the Governor of said Territory for the time being and that his Excellencey forward the Same to the President of the United States Given under our hands & Seals the day and date above mentioned.— Rocheblave [L. s.] Agreeable to the above request of the Grand Inquest we have thought proper to forward the Inclosed
Page 374
374 TERRITORIAL PAPERS To His Excellencey the Governor of the Territory of the United States for the time being by order of the Court William Sl Clair Clerk Witness our hands and the Seal of our Court of Quarter sessions the day and date above mentioned Ant Girardin francois janis Jn Dumoulin ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT WITH THE WABASH INDIANS [LC: Washington Papers :C] [March 14, 1792] Articles of certain engagements passed at Fort Knot at Vincennes between John Francis Hamtramck Esquire Major of the 1" United States Regimt on the one part and the Chiefs of different tribes of In- dians on the Wabash on the other part with the following Conditions— 1" That as Major Hamtramck has not sufficient power to conclude a treaty of peace with the Indians of the Wabash, he shall immediately inform the great Chief of the United States, that it is the sincere desire of the Indians here represented to bury the hatchet for ever and to establish a lasting peace and friendship with the United States— 2d1y That measures may be speedily taken to conclude a solid and everlasting treaty of peace between the Wabash Indians and the United States and that the treaty shall be held at Vincennes— 3dly That the United States shall confirm to the Indians the lands they legally claim and that no part shall be taken from them, but by a fair purchase and to their satisfaction. 4ly The Indians here represented solemnly promise on their part, that no more hostilities or depredations shall be committed by them on any of the Citizens of the United States. 5ly That they will at all times give notice to the commanding Officer of Fort Knox or other Garrison of any designs which they may know to be carried on by any nation of Indians or any individual whatever, against the interest or prejudicial to the United States.
Page 375
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 375 In Testimony whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names. J. F Hamtramck Major. 1. Und S. Regt Kickapooquaigh his X mark Atchenewaugh his X mark Contomaumgaugh his X mark Awpaighchenecaugh his X mark Pullaaswaigh his X mark Chacowaatagh his X mark La Poussiere his X mark Witness E. Beatty. Capt 1. Reg. U. States Ross Bird Ens" 1. U. States Reg. A Prior Lt 1. U. States Regt 03 V IS u 0) Peankeunshaw Checunememshaw his X mark his X mark PROVISIONAL ARTICLE As the Kickapoos of the Weya have left that Country and gone on the Illinois River, and are not represented with us in council We the Chiefs of the Eel River and Weya Indians farther agree that in case the said Kickapoos should return on the Wabash we shall use our endeavours to bring them to the above mentioned measures or otherwise to drive them out of the Country. Witness E Beatty Capt 1. Reg. U. States Ross Bird Ens" 1. U. States Regt A Prior Lt 1. U. States Reg. m IE U 0l > 2:1 'Kickapooquaigh bis X mark Atchenewaugh his X mark CONTOMAUMGUASH his X mark Awpaighchenecaugh his X mark PULLAAISWAIGH bis X mark Chacawaatagh bis X mark La Poussiere bis X mark Peankeunshaw his X mark Checokenemanshaw his X mark F Hamtramck Major 1. U S. Reg. Done and concluded 14. March 1793[2]— The foregoing are true copies from the originals. Chf clk—W. D. May 15th 1792 Jn° Stagg Junr
Page 376
376 TERRITORIAL PAPERS GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS «] Philadelphia March 26th 1792 Sir, I beg leave to offer you my unfeigned Thanks for the honor conferred upon me by the Appointment to the command of the Army of the united States the last campaign. Though that Campaign was unfortunate, I am not conscious that any thing, within my power to have produced a more happy issue, was neglected. As I was prompted, Sir, to accept that Command by no motives of either Ambition or Interest, but by a fervent Wish to be of Service to my Country, and a Belief, perhaps too fondly entertained that I could be so, that I am led to decline it in future proceeds neither from Disgust not Dis- appointment. Having been much afflicted with Sickness during nearly the whole of the Campaign, tho' I flatter myself the public Interests did not suffer by it, and although my Health is now tolerably restored, my Constitu- tion has received a very severe shock, and I might not again be able to go through the weight of Business which necessarily follows the command of an Army. Although Sir, I am myself persuaded that every thing was done, in the Course of the last Campaign, that could be done on my part, fully to answer the public Expectations, yet it is denied by some, doubted by many, and known to but few out of the Army—A Wish to rectify the public Opinion, and a Duty that, I conceive I owe to myself, induces me to request that an Enquiry into my conduct may be instituted—When that is over I may hope to be permitted to resign the Commission of Major General which I now hold. Should the Result of the Enquiry be that, in any Instance, the Duties of my Station were neglected; or, that I did not improve every Hour, and every Opportunity to the best Advantage; or,.that the Operations of the Army, after it was in a Condition to operate; were delayed one Moment in consequence of my illness, I shall patiently submit to the merited Censure.41 "Printed also, with variations, in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, U, 282-283. See letter to the President, Feb. 24, 1792, ante, p. 370, and that of the President to the Secretary of War, Feb. 29, ante, p. 370. M For St. Clair's official account of his defeat on Nov. 4, 1791, see his letter to the Secretary of War, Nov. 9, 1791, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 137-138; Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 262-267. A contemporary copy is in the Senate files, 2 Cong., 1 sess., which is the basis of the State Papers version. The original letter has not been found. In the Knox Papers (MHS) is an original letter from Col. William Darke to the President, of the same date, which draws wholly different conclu- sions relative to the causes of the defeat. There is a contemporary copy of this letter, with many changes in grammatical structure, in the Washington Papers (LC). The chief printed sources for the campaign of 1791 are in A.S.P., op.
Page 377
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 377 To whoever may be appointed my Successor, I shall be happy Sir, to give every Light and information my Situation as General of the Army, or of Governor of the western Territory put in my Power to obtain, and to evince to you Sir, and to the World, that the Confidence you were pleased to repose in me was not misplaced. With every Sentiment of Gratitude, of Respect, and allow me add of Affection I have the honor to be Sir, Your most obedient Servant Ar St Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Major Gen1 Sl Clair 26" March 1792. rit., pp. 136-138, 171-172. The foregoing references embody the various sets of instructions issued to Generals St. Clair and Butler and Quartermaster General Hodgson, summary reports of the Secretary of War, correspondence of a technical nature relating to actual military preparations, and the final result. Papers covering the inquiry into the defeat of Nov. 4, 1791, are found in A.S.P., Mil. Affairs, I, 36-40. In Smith (ed.), op. cit., pp. 200-209, 212-218, 222-246, 247- 262, 267-278, will be found the correspondence of St. Clair with military sub- ordinates, and with the President and the Secretary of War, and the journal of Major Ebenezer Denny, St. Clair's aide. The diary of Adjutant General Sargent is printed in Ohio Arch, and Hist. Soc. Quar., xxxm, 237-273; Jones (ed.), 1851 edition; Galbreath, Hist. Ohio, I, 207-232; Cent. Hist. Butler Co. (Ohio), pp. 57-77. In Mich. Hist. Colls., xxiv, 163-202, 209-223, 225-233,241-248,253-279, 283-308, 321-337, are documents of a varied character (duplicating in many instances papers cited in the foregoing references), which emanated originally from both American and British sources, but derived in this instance from copies in the Dominion archives of Canada. This edition is not altogether trustworthy as to accuracy, but neither are the copies on which it is based. Fugitive papers are also found in Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 251-257; Sparks (ed.), Writings Washington, X, 149-150, 152-156, 183-185; Ford (ed.), Writings Wash- ington, XII, 24-25, 31-32, 78-79. Among the unprinted papers are certain originals in the St. Clair Papers (OSL, box 9), comprising letters from the Secretary of War to St. Clair touching the campaign of 1791; most of the originals in this group have disappeared, but a few remain. In the same repository are a number of letters from the War Depart- ment to General Butler. In the Washington Papers (LC) are various originals and copies of letters passing between the Secretary of War and the President. See especially letters from the former of Apr. 4, May 30, and June 6, 8, and 23, 1791. The Innes Papers (LC), vol. XIX, contain about a dozen letters of impor- tance concerning preparations for the expedition, and in the Jefferson Papers (LC) is a narrative by Judge Innes, inclosed in a letter from Augustine Davis to Jefferson, Dec. 1, 1791. The Knox Papers (MHS), vol. xxix, contain letters and reports, July to September, 1791. In the Sargent Papers (MHS) are copies of three letters from Wilkinson to St. Clair, Aug. 25 and 26, 1791, and an original list of killed and wounded in the engagement of Nov. 4. There is also a copy of this paper in the Senate Files, 2 Cong., 1 sess. The Sargent Papers (OHS) con- tain numerous documents relating to the campaign. The orderly book of General St. Clair is in the Library of the Wisconsin Historical Society. There are also in this Library the Richard Butler Papers, Captain Newman's original journal of the expedition of 1791, a quantity of documents utilized in St. Clair's defense before the Congressional investigating committee, and other subsidiary material.
Page 378
378 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE PRESIDENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [Huntington Lib:LS «] United States, March 28th 1792. Sir, Your knowledge of the Country North-west of the Ohio, and of the resources for an Army in its vicinity, added to a full confidence in your military character, founded on mature experience, induced my nomination of you to the command of the troops on the frontiers Your desire of rectifying any errors of the public opinion, relatively to your conduct, by an investigation of a Court of Enquiry, is highly laudable, and would be readily complied with, were the measure prac- ticable.—But a total deficiency of Officers, in actual service, of compe- tent rank to form a legal Court, for that purpose, precludes the power of gratifying your wishes on the occasion The intimation of your readiness to afford your successor all the information of which you are capable, although unnecessary for my personal conviction, must be regarded as an additional evidence of the goodness of your heart, and of your attachment to your Country." I am, Sir, with esteem and regard Your most Obedt Servt G° Washington Major General Arthur Sl Clair « Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 283-284, from the draft in SD Archives (Misc. Letters). There is a photostat copy in the Library of Con- gress made from the original signed letter in the Huntington Library. The body of the letter is in the handwriting of Tobias Lear. "At the end of the draft (SD Archives, Misc. Letters) there appears the fol- lowing paragraph, with a line drawn around it: "While I accept your resignation, for the cause you state, I sincerely regret the occasion—I fervently hope, that your health may be perfectly re-established', and that you may enjoy uninterrupted happiness.—" The Smith version prints these lines as a part of the letter; but they are not in the letter sent. Captain R. B. Haselden, curator of manuscripts in the Huntington Library, made a careful examination of the original for possible traces of any additional matter. His report, Aug. 30, 1932, follows: "Our letter of Washington to St. Clair, March 28, 1792, is a letter signed, 2 pp. 4to. The upper half of the second page has been removed and the rest of the page contains no writing of any sort. I think this missing portion was lost accidentally as the rest of the same sheet has a very bad crease which has been repaired. I examined the upper half of the complete page with ultra-violet light to see if I could observe any signs of offset from writing that may have been on the missing part, but there was no trace. While I cannot be absolutely certain I do not think that our letter contained any other writing." It is apparent that this letter and the one from St. Clair to the President of Mar. 26 were drafted in concert by the President, the Secretaries of War and State, and the Governor for public consumption. See the Secretary of State to the President, Mar. 2, 1792, ante, p. 371.
Page 379
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 379 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Philada Mar. 28. 1792. Sir I have the honor to inclose you two letters from Judge Symmes of Jan. 25,h & 27th u his letter of Sep. 17." mentioned in the first of these was received by me Nov. 23. and after being laid before you, was answered Dec. 4.48 The part of the answer respecting leave from you to come to Philadelphia, was in these words. 'the President does not conceive that the Constitution has given him any controul over the proceedings of the Judges, and therefore considers that his permission or refusal of absence from your district would be merely nugetory'. With respect to the escort for the judges on their circuits, you will be pleased to determine whether the good of the service will permit them to have one from the military, or whether that part of the letter shall be laid before the legislature to make regular provision for an escort. That part of the letter respecting jails, must, as I apprehend, be laid before the legislature. The complaint against Capt Armstrong, in the letter of Jan. 27. coming formally from a judge, will require notice.47 a civil prosecution in the courts of the Territory appears to me most proper. perhaps a formal instruction to the Governor as Commander in chief to put his officers on their guard against any resistance to civil process might have the effect of preventing future disputes. I shall have the honor of waiting on you to take your pleasure on these several subjects, & have now that of being with sentiments of profound respect & sincere attachment Sir Your most obedt & most humble servt Th: Jefferson The President of the U. S. [Endorsed] From the Secy of State 28th March 1792. u Neither of these letters has been found. The substance of the letter of Jan. 25, however, appears to be the same as that from Symmes to Boudinot and Dayton of the same date (Bond, ed., Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 159-162). 45 Not found. "Jefferson Papers (LC). 47 See Symmes to Boudinot and Dayton, Jan. 25, 1792, Bond (ed.), op. ext., p. 161.
Page 380
380 TERRITORIAL PAPERS MAJOR J. F. HAMTRAMCK TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC:Washington Papers: C] Fort Knox March 31. 1792 Sir The 28th Instant I received a letter from Lt Col. Wilkinson who informed me of his appointment in the army and who directed me to send some agents to all the Belligerent Tribes of Savages, resident on the Wabash Illinois river, and on the South eastern borders of Lake Michigan, which shall be done as speedily as possible. Since my last letter I had the honor of writing you, the Chiefs of the Eel River and of the Weya have been with me, their intention is to be at peace with the United States, and to have for its basis, certain articles of agreement,48 which I have made with them and the only ones I could find to be consonant to their wishes. This negocia- tion having taken place previous to my receiving the orders of Lieut Col. Wilkinson, will I suppose be found sufficient without sending to them—however if it should be found necessary for them to go to Fort Washington, they soon can be informed of it—From Col. Wilkinson I expect to receive farther directions on that point. The Peankishaws the only nation remaining on the Wabash, who have not yet been with me have been prevented by the death of their King, on his way to Fort Knox and the Nation having no Prince Royal to succeed to the Crown have been employed for a long time in the election of a Monarch whenever that is done, which will be in about a week, I expect to see them when I will probably have an opportunity of secur- ing their friendship—Indeed I have very little doubt of their adopting the measures of the others—Altho the Indians did not show a dis- position to return to war, I found it was necessary to guard against their joining those of the Miami who will no doubt give them very pressing invitations in the spring—this could not be done without some engagements on both sides which I have the honor to inclose. I hope Sir they will be acceptable, I have done for the best, and all that could be done. It is difficult for me to give you any assurance of their sincerity—if they are sincere, it is from no other motive but to get back their prisoners—however—it may be very easy after this to keep them in a pacific State, and to prevent them from joining those who are hostile, this can be effected by some acts of generosity towards them—for if our Government does not make them presents they will go to the British, who will be glad to see them and who will supply them amply—I asked the two chiefs of Eel River who were with me, and who are neighbours to the Miamis if the British had given any presents to the Indians last summer—their Answer was— «8 Mar. 14, 1792, ante, p. 374.
Page 381
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 381 Yes my father, the Goods were in large heaps like stacks of Hay49—do you get Arms and Ammunition also? We get every thing but big Guns. If you had done so and if your people had not told the Indians that their lands belonged to you you would have had no war—I have been informed by some Indians that a number of Merchants with Goods from Michlemackinac were in the prairies towards the Illinois River trading with the Indians.60 Indeed I am sure some of them have been on the Wabash and undersold our Merchants and there is now in this village a quantity of goods from that place and New Orleans which consequently has paid no duty to the United States— The Laws of this Territory or the laws of the United States have made no provision to prevent it, to the great detriment of those merchants who buy their goods in the United States and cannot sell so cheap. But the worst evil of all is a number of Villains in this Village who keep the Indians continually drunk, there is so much difficulty and ceremony to find them out that not one of them has yet been punished since the civil government has taken place, and the most fatal consequences may be expected if it continues—for the Indians, who will sell all their peltrys for liquor will find themselves and families naked in the spring and having no means to procure ammunition or other necessaries will go to war for plunder—the only possible way to prevent this abuse would be to prohibit all spiritous liquors to be brought into the place—without permission from the commanding Officer, and if only one or two Men were intrusted to sell or keep liquor in his house, it would be a very easy thing to pre- vent the Indians from getting drunk—Such measures may possibly be contrary to the principles of a republican Government, but it is not less necessary in this place in our present situation of affairs—Civil Law is an admirable institution any where except on a frontier situated in the center of an Indian Country and in a time of War—before the civil authority took place, I was well acquainted with every thing that passed in the village. No Indians came in. No person gave them lodging without my knowledge, few of them got drunk in com- parison to what it is now All persons and strangers coming into the village were obliged to report themselves, by which means I received every intelligence The Governor sensible of the necessity of such regulations, has by proclamation and militia orders provided for its continuance, but I am sorry to say that no part of it is put in execution neither is it in my power at present to enforce it— "See McKee's speech to the Indians at the Miami (Maumee) rapids, July 1 1791, Cruikshank (ed.), Simcoe Papers, I, 36. M See memorial of Montreal merchants to Lord Dorchester, 1791, ibid., pp. 56-57.
Page 382
382 TERRITORIAL PAPERS All the information I could obtain from the chiefs who were with me, was that all the Indians of the Lakes intended to go to war early in the spring and that their Women and Children were to be supplied with provisions by Capt McKee the British Agent for Indian affairs— they also informed me that the pieces of Cannon lost on the 4th of November last, were left on the ground, that a large party of Indians intended to keep at a small distance from the place to attack any body who should come to take them off that the number of the Indians against us last action had been about 1500—that we were then about four good days march from the Miami and on the waters of. the Wabash, and that the loss of the Indians had been very inconsiderable. Another circumstance which may not be amiss to inform you of is that two Indians of the tribes taken prisoner last year went from here to Fort Washington last summer on a visit to their friends—there they saw the Chickasaw Indians who were on the expedition with us, who told them, that it was a folly for the Indians of the lakes, to be at war with us, that they themselves had been a long time in arms against the White people, but they at last found it their interest to live in peace with them—that their nation and the Choctaws would join the Americans to go against them if it should be necessary. these circum- stances were reported by the above two Indians who returned to their Nation the last Autumn, and came up the river with me. This appears to have struck the Indians with such a panic that it has reached the Miami—who I am informed would make peace with the United States, if they had an opportunity— As it is necessary to permit some merchants to go into the Indian Towns, I have made choice of a few, who have entered into a bond of one thousand dollars, and to whom I have given licence for six Months— On this head I expect to receive some directions from the Governor, to whom I have wrote on the subject—The getting of firewood for the garrison has become very difficult, we are obliged to go at so great a distance for it, that it keeps the men on a constant fatigue, this to- gether with some other inconveniencies we lay under by being so near the Town, would render it adviseable to move the Garrison, further up the River The Governor in my instructions directs me to try to obtain the consent of the Indians for the establishment of a Garrison at the Eel River or the Weya—I have not yet found matters sufficiently ripe to make the proposition but I believe that some presents would remove every difficulty that might exist. Since my writing the above I have received a letter from Colonel Wilkinson who directs me to send a couple of Spies to the Miami in order to get intelligence of the disposition of the Indians—I have
Page 383
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 383 engaged two confidential Indians who are to set off immediately and to return sometime in May. I have the honor to be & . . T - „ Uiirami„m, (signed) Jn° F. Hamtramck Major General Knox. P. S. We have on hand for about Six Months provision but the Indians who are every day in the Garrison consume some of it, and it is unavoidable—J F H GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS «l] Philadelphia, March 31" 1792 Sir, I have had the honor to receive your Letter of the twenty eighth instant.M While I lament that Circumstances prevent an Investi- gation into my Conduct by a Court of Enquiry, I can not but acquiesce in the Reasons you have assigned why it can not take Place, And I beg leave to present my thanks for the Desire to have gratified me, had it been practicable, which you have been pleased to manifest. In my Letter to you Sir, of the twenty sixth,531 expressed an Inten- tion of retiring from the Army when the Enquiry should be over:—The only Reason I had for wishing to retain my Commission until that time was, that if any misconduct should appear,in the Course of the Enquiry, I might be amenable to a Court-Martial, which a Resignation would have precluded— The House of Representatives Sir, have directed an Enquiry into the Causes of the failure of the last Campaign to be made by a Committee of their own Body:54 The same Reason that influ- enced me when a Court of Enquiry was contemplated, operates now with equal Force; and therefor it may be proper that I should still retain my Commission; but, as it will soon be requisite that some Person should be at the Head of the Army who is to continue to com- mand it, it is necessary, Sir, that I should inform You explicitly, which I now do, of my fixed Resolution to resign the Moment that Enquiry is finished should no fault be found; that any Embarrassment which may exist, with respect to providing a Successor for me, may be removed. « Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 284-285. There is a draft in the St. Clair Papers (OSL). The differences between the draft and the Smith version, and the original letter from which the present text is taken, are numerous. 42 Aide, p. 378. - Ante, p. 376. * Mar. 27, 1792, Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 490. For other motives, the debate thereon, and the proceedings of the committee, see ibid., pp. 549, 555, 601-602; 2 Cong., 2 sess., 672, 679-684, 685-689, 877, 895, 899-906, and app., 1052-1059, 1106-1113; 3 Cong., 1 sess., 949; 3 Cong., 2 sess., 946; the Secretary of War to the
Page 384
384 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Be pleased to observe Sir, that my sole Object is to give Effect to public Justice, in the usual Way by a Court Martial, should it appear that, in any manner whatsoever, the Misfortunes of the last Campaign can be attributed to me—and it is the proper, and I believe the only Tribunal where military Crimes and Misconduct can be enquired into and punished; or, where an Officers Reputation, infinitely dearer than Life, can be vindicated.—Should the public Service, however, require that another Officer of the same Rank with me be appointed immedi- atly, I am ready to make the Resignation forthwith, notwithstanding that it may seem to proceed, and, at a distance, will be supposed to have arisen, from a Sense that the Volume of Calumny and Defamation, which is daily pouring from the Press into the public Ear, has too much foundation for me to meet it—that I shrink from the Consequences and chuse to shelter myself in a private Station:—I am ready Sir, upon this Occasion as I ever have been upon every other, to sacrifice every private and personal Consideration to the public Good. With every Sentiment of Respect I have the Honor to be Sir, Your most obedient Servant Ar St Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Maj Gen1 Sl Clair 31" March 1792 65 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS:Sargent Papers:C M] Philadelphia, April 4,1792. Dear Sir:—I have received two letters from you (the dates 1 cannot mention as I have them not at hand, but they are those re- lating to Darke ") for which I am very much obliged to you, and they come very opportunely—the first to take off any prejudice that might have laid hold of the mind of the President by Darke's letter to him,68 and the other to present Darke in his proper colours to the Committee of Congress that are now sitting to inquire into the causes of the failure of the last campaign which as you have been good enough to permit me to consider not as confidential, I shall lay before them. The object of this committee is in truth to discover some cause of complaint against General Knox, at least so it seems to me; but it House of Representatives, Nov. 1, 1792, A.S.P., Mil. Affairs, I, 39. The report of the investigating committee is printed ibid., pp. 41-44. Cf. St. Clair to Sargent, Aug. 27, 1792, Sargent Papers (MHS). ■ Answered Apr. 4, 1792, post, p. 386. "From a typed copy; the location of the original is unknown. »7 Feb. 7 and 8, 1792, St. Clair Papers (OSL). ■ Nov. 9, 1791, Knox Papers (MHS).
Page 385
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 385 will answer the purpose of an inquiry into my conduct which I had requested of the President, but which it was impossible to obtain for want of officers of sufficient rank. On many occasions in the course of the business, your testimony would have been of great use and I am sorry that it cannot be had, not on that account only, but that it must have appeared how very useful you had been on the course of the campaign. Of that, however, I shall not lose sight, and I trust I shall be able to bring forward enough to serve for us both. The business of the Scioto Purchase has not been stirred in Congress. Judge Putnam and Mr. Cutler are both here, and on that of the Ohio Company, a Bill is reported 59 giving that Company seven hundred fifty thousand acres for the money they have already paid—granting them one hundred thousand acres in lieu of the donations, and an allowance to pay in a certain sum on Army Warrants. The Bill is not come from the Press or I would have sent you a copy. My health is still very far from being restored, but it is returning and now the fine season is set in I look forward to its reestablishment. I shall not again, however, commit it in another campaign, and have given the President notice that as soon as this inquiry is closed I shall resign, that he may provide me a successor in time. Who that will be, I cannot inform you, tho' probably it may be General Pinckney of South Carolina. As soon as I can do it with any conveniency, I propose to return to Fort Washington where I may possibly spend the Summer and then take a lasting farewell of the Western Territory. Congress has voted five thousand men,60 but when they will be raised God only knows, and my fears—not for that country only, but the whole frontier—are not a little roused. Indeed, my dear Sir, much mischief I fear will be done before anything will be in readiness to counteract it. Pray remember me to General Wilkinson affectionately. He has written very handsomely of you to the Secretary of War. I should have written to him by this opportunity but have not time—this being scribbled in the Committee with a crowd about me and questions and answers that I am obliged to attend to. Adieu. Believe me ever with best wishes and very great regards, dear Sir, Your very humble servant, A. St. Clair. To Col. Winthrop Sargent. » Mar. 29, 1792, Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 494. See act, approved Apr. 21, 1792, 1 Stat. 257-258. M "An act for making farther and more effectual provision for the protection of the frontier of the United States", approved Mar. 5, 1792, 1 Stat. 241-243. 128650—34 28
Page 386
386 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE PRESIDENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:Misc. Letters :D«l] United States April 4th 1792. Sir. I have read and duly considered your letter of the 31'st ultimo.82 The reasons you offer, for retaining your commission, until an opportunity should be presented, if necessary, of investigating your conduct, in every mode prescribed by law, would be conclusive with me, under any other circumstances than the present. But, the establishment of the troops allows only of one major gen- eral—You have manifested your intention of retiring, and the essential interests of the public require, that your successor should be immedi- ately appointed, in order to repair to the frontiers. As the house of representatives have been pleased to institute an enquiry into the causes of the failure of the late expedition, I should hope an opportunity would thereby be afforded you, of explaining your conduct, in a manner satisfactory to the public and yourself. To M Gen1 Sl Clair [Endorsed] To Maj Gen1 Sl Clair 4th April 1792. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS ■] Philadelphia April 7th 1792 Sir, I have had the honor to receive your letter of the fourth instant. Although I was very desirous Sir, to hold my Commission of Major General until the Enquiry by the Committee of the House of Representatives should be over, for the Reasons which I assigned, and which you are pleased to think have some Weight, yet the evident necessity of the Officers being appointed who is to command the Troops, in order to his repairing to the Frontiers, is certainly pressing and ought to silence, with me, every Wish of a mere personal nature; I do therefor Sir, now formally resign the Appointment of Major General. I have never Sir, entertained a doubt that an Enquiry into the Causes of the failure of the late Expedition, whether directed par- ticularly to my Conduct, or to that connected with other Causes that may have operated, in whatever way it might be conducted, would not prove honorable to me and satisfactory to the public, as far as I was connected with it; but setting, as I do, a due value upon "Printed also in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 285. The original letter has not been discovered. « Ante, p. 383. 43 Printed also in Smith (ed.), op. cit., pp. 285-286, from a draft in the St. Clair Papers (OSL).
Page 387
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 387 the public Opinion, and desirous not to lose that Place in the Esteem of the virtuous and intelligent of my fellow Citizens which I have long held, you will not wonder that, under existing Circumstances, a degree of anxiety, not only that an Enquiry should be made, but that every thing, capable of being misconstrued, should be avoided on my part.—I will own to you Sir, that the Desire of honest Fame has ever been the strongest Passion in my Breast—I have thought that I had merited it—and is all that I have to compensate me for the Sacrifice of a very independant Situation, and the best Years of my life devoted to the public Service, and the faithful Application of my Talents, such as they were, in every Situation in which I have been placed, with a Zeal bordering upon Enthusiasm.—I trust Sir, I shall yet enjoy it,—while those who have attempted to disturb it will be forgotten, or remembered with indignation, and in their Bosoms, if they have feeling, Sensations may arise something similar to what Milton has described to have seized upon Satan when he discovered our first Parents in Paradise. With every sentiment of respect and duty I have the honor to be Sir your most obedient Servant Ar St Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Maj. Gen1 Sl Clair 7th April 1792 MEMORIAL OF THE ILLINOIS AND WABASH LAND COMPANIES [SF:2 Cong., 1 sess.:C] [April 11, 1792] To the Senate of the United States The Memorial of the Subscribers, representing the Ilinois and Wabash Land Company Respectfully sheweth That they have seen the Report, which your Committee have made upon the former Memorial on Behalf of the said Company64 That the said Committee have assumed, as Law, and as the Basis of their Report, a Principle, which, in the humble Opinion of your Memoralists, is not founded on the Law of the Land. Wherefore your Memoralists pray that they may be heard, per- sonally or by Counsel, before you, in Opposition to the Principle of the said Report 11th April 1792. James Wilson William Smith Jn° Shee « Dec. 12, 1791, ante, p. 353. See Cal. Va. State Papers, VI, 1-36.
Page 388
388 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [Endorsed] Legis" 2d Cong: Sess: 1" Memorial of James Wilson and others, representing the Ilinois and Wabash Land Companies, pray- ing to be heard in opposition to the report of a Committee on their former petition April 11th 1792. Lye upon the Table AN ACT TO ASCERTAIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE PURCHASE OF JOHN CLEVES SYMMES [SD:Original Statutes"] [April 12, 1792] An Act for ascertaining the bounds of a tract of land purchased by John Cleves Symmes.66 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of ihe United States of America, in Congress assembled, that the President of the United States be and he hereby is authorized at the request of John Cleves Symmes or his Agent or Agents, to alter the contract made between the late board of Treasury and the said John Cleves Symmes for the sale of a tract of land of one million of Acres,67 in such manner that the said tract may extend from the mouth of the great Miami, to the mouth of the little Miami, and be bounded by the river Ohio on the South,68 by the great Miami on the West, by the little Miami « Printed in 6 Stat. 7-8. M This measure was initiated by a memorial of Benjamin Stites, to whom Symmes had sold lands along the Little Miami River, outside the boundary of the grant as described in the contract of Oct. 15, 1788. In order to secure title to the lands, which were already being settled, Stites prayed for an alteration in the boundaries of the Symmes grant. See Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, p. 26, n. 5. See also Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess. (House), 480, 482, 483; (Senate), 113,116, 117. The report of the Senate committee on the Symmes purchase is found in the Senate files, 2 Cong. The various phases of the controversy relative to the boundaries of the Symmes or Miami purchase, antecedent to the passage of the above act, may be found in the letters of St. Clair to Symmes, May 23, ante, p. 342, and July 12 and 14, 1791, Journal Exec. Procs., post, m, 349, 353; the Governor's proclamations of July 19 and Sept. 15, 1791, ibid., pp. 354, 357; St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, May 25, 1791, ante, p. 347; Symmes to St. Clair, May 23, 1791, ante, p. 343, and August 24, 1791 (Draper MSS., 1WW3, Wis. Hist. Soc.); the Secretary of State to Symmes, Aug. 6, 1791 (Jefferson Papers, LC), and to the President, Nov. 10, 1791, ante, p. 352; Symmes to Dayton, Aug. 15, 1791, and Jan. 25, 1792 (Bond, ed., Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 146-153, 159-162). See also Reynolds v. McArthur (2 Peters, 417-441); Lessee of Harmar's Heirs v. Morris and Gwynne (1 McLean, 44-50); Buel r. Tuley (4 McLean, 268-272). «7 Oct. 15, 1788, printed (in part) in Burnet, Notes, pp. 490-491. M See Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 802-803, for resolution of Oct. 23, 1787, relative to the frontage on the various rivers of all proposed land grants. No frontage on the rivers Mississippi, Ohio, Wabash, or Illinois should exceed one third of the depth of a given grant from such rivers. The original grant to Symmes had a frontage of twenty miles on the Ohio River; the distance between the mouths of the two Miami rivers is roughly thirty-five miles.
Page 389
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 389 on the East, and by a Parallel of latitude on the North extending from the great Miami to the little Miami, so as to comprehend the proposed quantity of one million of Acres,69 provided that the Northern Limits of the said tract shall not interfere with the boundary line established by the treaty of Fort Harmar, between the United States and the Indian Nations,70 and provided also that the President reserve to the United States, such lands at and near Fort Washington as he may think necessary for the accommodation of a Garrison at that Fort.71 Jonathan Trumbull Speaker of the House of Representatives. John Adams Vice president of the United States, and president of the Senate. Approved April twelfth. 1792. G° Washington— President of the United States I certify that this Act did originate in the House of Representatives. John Beckley,—Clerk. LIST OF PAPERS: CONTRACT WITH JOHN CLEVES SYMMES [SF:4 Cong., 2 sess.:ADS] List of 51 Papers Relative to Contract Between the United States and John C. Symmes N° 1. The petition of John Cleves Symmes to Congress of the 29th of August 1787. and the Resolution of Congress thereon of the 2nd of October 1787.72 N° 2. The printed pamphlet with the out-lines of the contract con- templated in the first proposition.73 N° 3. Copy of a letter from J. C. S. to the commissioners of the treasury-board, proposing some alterations as to the quan- tity of land. june the 11th 1788.74 N° 4. Osgoods calculations, stating the amount of the purchase money, contemplated.74 M See reports of the Attorneys General to the House of Representatives, May 5, 1796, and Jan. 26, 1803, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 67-68, 127-131. The latter, by Attorney General Lincoln, is an exhaustive report on the Symmes contract. 70 See treaty with the Wyandots, Jan. 9, 1789, ante, p. 174. » Cf. request for alteration of patent, Sept. 29,1794, post, p. 490, and the patent of Sept. 30, 1794, post, p. 496. B Ante, p. 70. 73 Nov 26, 1787, Quar. Pub. Hist. and Phil. Soc. Ohio, V, 82-92. M Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 29-30. ™ Ibid., p. 30.
Page 390
390 TERRITORIAL PAPERS N° 5. Walter Livingston & Arthur Lee, their letter to John C. Symmes. 16th june 1788.78 N° 6. Treasurer Hillegas his receipt, july 12th 1788.77 N° 7. Letter from J C S. to Commissioners of the board of treasury, protesting against receeding from the banks of Little Miami. 14th july 1788.78 N° 8. Power of Attorney from J C S. to Mr Dayton and Mr Marsh, authorising them to conclude the Contract. August 10 th 1788.7" N° 9. The Contract sealed, October 15th 1788.80 N° 10. Mr Daytons reasoning on the subject of the military war- rants for land. 29th May 1790." N° 11. Letter from the secretary of the treasury to Mr Israel Ludlow the surveyor. 20th Novr 1790.81 N° 12. Letter from J C S. to Governor St Clair, contending for the land, quite to the mouth of the Little Miami River. 17th of june 1791.82 N° 13. Mr Attorney-general Randolphs opinion on the Reasoning of Mr Dayton on the value of Army Rights. But as to John C. Symmes, he had no sort of interest in the question.— he had no warrants.—nor did he he gain or lose one acre, at what rate soever they might be received.—Every Acre allowed on the rights, went to Military characters who held those army warrants, and whether they were dis- counted at much or little, it was nothing to Mr Symmes.81 N° 14. An extract from Mr Jeffersons report on the subject of the western Lands 8th Novr 1791.83 N° 15. Auditors report on the account of J. C. S.81 N° 16. Memorial of the Ohio company to Congress dated the 2nd March 1792.84 N° 17. Report of the special committee of Congress on the Memorial of the Ohio company.85 "Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 31-32. 77 Copy in collection of Peter G. Thompson, Cincinnati, Ohio. 78 Bond (ed.), op. cit., pp. 33-34. "Not found; see ibid., p. 38. 80 Not found; see ibid., p. 49. The contract was entered on the records of Hamilton County, Mar. 17, 1821 (Miller, Cincinnati's Beginnings, p. 53), and in its essential parts is printed in Burnet, Notes, pp. 490-491. 81 Not found. 88 Referred to in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 211, but not printed and location not given. 88 A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 22-25. 84 Cutler (ed.), Journals, Cutler, 1, 471, 477. »Ibid., pp. 477-479.
Page 391
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 391 N° 18. Dates of Mr Stites's two contracts which he exhibitted before the Committee of the senate, shewing that he had early purchased lands on the bank of the Little Miami.88 N° 19. Memorial of Mr Dayton, as agent of J C S. praying for terms as favorable as were, or might be granted to the Ohio Company. april 11, 1792. N° 20. Act of Congress of 12th April 1792.89 N° 21. Journals of the Senate. April 17th 1792.90 N° 22. Act of Congress of 5th May 1792. authorising the President to protest &c.91 N° 23. Surveyor Ludlow's letter to Mr Secretary Hamilton—6th May 1792.92 N° 24. two certificates from the Registers office of the payments made in military warrants at the treasury, by the Ohio company, shewing that they received one dollar credit, for every acre of Military rights. N° 25. Mr Randolphs opinion with respect to the powers of Mr Dayton, to request an alteration of the boundaries of the Miami Contract according to the Act of 5th April 92. N° 26. Copy of a letter from Col. Hamilton to Mr Ludlow, surveyor—Novr 25th 1792. N° 27. Letter from Mr Ludlow to Col. Hamilton on the subject of surveying. N° 28. Letter of J C S. to the secretary of the treasury. 8th of june 1793. N° 29. Auditors report on the account of John C Symmes with the United States. june the 11th 1793. N° 30. Letter from Mr Ludlow to Colonel Hamilton, on the survey. 10th july 1793 N° 31. Copy of a letter from Col. Hamilton to Mr Ludlow the surveyor. 17th july 1793. N° 32. The request of J C S. to the President for an alteration of boundary. 29th Sept. 94.93 The patent of alteration of boundary and confirmation of Contract. The patent in fee for upwards of three hundred thousand acres. 30th Sept: 1794.94 M Nos. 18 and 19 not found. «• Ante, p. 388. *• Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 125. •i Post, p. 394. n Nos. 23 to 31 inclusive have not been found. •» Post, p. 490. M Post, pp. 492, 496.
Page 392
392 TERRITORIAL PAPERS N° 33. The report of Mr Attorney General Lee. On the contract of JCS. 5th May 1796.95 N° 34. The petition of John C. Symmes to the house of Representa- tives. 26th Decmr 96.06 N° 35. The Registers statement of the account of J C S. with the United States. 17th Jany 97. N° 36. Mr Wolcotts letter of 18th Jany 1797 to the Honh,e Mr Gallatin, of the Committee. 37— Memorandum taken by Mr Gallatin, at the examination of Mr Ludlow. 38— Statement of Mr Symmes to the Committee of the Honhle the Representatives. 39— Second letter of Mr Wolcott to Mr Gallatin. 24th of January 1797. 40 Report of the Committee of the house of Representatives. 9th February 1797." N° 41. A bill which passed the honhle house of Representatives, & was lost in Senate 08 42. Petition of J C S. to the honhle Senate praying amendments to said bill, then before the Senate. 27th February 1797." 43. Letter from J C S. to Mr Wolcott, proffering to pay money into the treasury of the United States. 11th july 1797. 44 Petition from J C S. to the Honhle house of Representatives, in January 1799. N° 45. Letter from Jn° C S. to the President of the United States on the subject of the Miami Contract. 23rd January 1799. N° 46. Letter from JCS. to the Vice President in Senate, on the subject of the Miami Contract. 3rd of Feby 1799. 47. Petition of J C S. totheHonhle the house of Representatives. 18to Jany 1800. 48 Petition of JCS. to the honhle house of Representatives. January 18th 1802.1 Also a list of the houses & lands taken in execution by the sheriff.2 Also a return of sales thereof, made by the sheriff. at suit of sub-purchasers, & great sacrifice of property to J C S.J 95 A.S.P., Pub. Lands, i, 67-68. "Nos. 34 to 39 inclusive cannot be located. •» A.S.P., op. eit., pp. 75-76. t9 The bill as passed by the House is in the House files, 4 Cong., 2 sess., Feb. 23, 1797. w Nos. 42-47 inclusive not found. 1 Senate files, 14 Cong., 2 sess., Jan. 18, 1802. » Not found.
Page 393
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 393 N° 49 Memorial of J C S. to the honhle the senate of the United States 22nd April 1802.4 50 Reference thereof to special committee on the 23rd of April 1802.6 N° 51 Report of the Honhle the Committee of Senate on the said Memorial of John Cleves Symmes April 29th 1802.6 1846. May 21. On motion by Mr. Morehead Ordered That the Reps of John Cleves Symmes have leave to withdraw his petitions and papers. 1846 Septr 24. Recd of the Secy of the Senate the petitions and papers of John Cleves Symmes above listed— A R Quantrill For M S. Clarke. Attorney [Endorsed] Arrangement of papers by number, and priority of dates. [Accompanying memoranda] Asbury Dickens Esq Sectry. &c— Dear Sir. Under the leave granted, on motion of Senator More- head, I had the use of the papers of John Cleves Symmes and returned them—I desire to look into them again—Will the Secretary be so good as to hand them to the bearer, Mr Quantrill, and they will be again returned in a few days— Your Obt Servt Mr. St Clair Clarke 23d Sept. 1846 Council & agent for the Heirs of Jn° C. Symmes— [Endorsed] Asbury Dickens, Esq Secretary & &c from Mr Clarke It wd appear by this form of the order that all the papers in the case are to be withdrawn—Am I right in this view?—Mr Quantrill the agent promises to return them in two or three days at farthest and will so receipt for them if required. M D. Yes—The papers of J. C. Symmes include all presented by him or on his behalf * Senate files, 7 Cong., Apr. 22, 1802. ! Annals, 7 Cong., 1 sess., 274. • A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 126-127.
Page 394
394 TERRITORIAL PAPERS A GRANT OF LANDS TO JOHN CLEVES SYMMES AND ASSOCIATES [SD : Original Statutes7] [May 5,1792] An Act authorizing the grant and conveyance of certain lands to John Cleves Symmes and his Associates.9 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled, that the President of the United States be and he hereby is authorized and empowered to issue letters patent in the name and under the seal of the United States, thereby granting and conveying to John Cleves Symmes and his associates, and to their heirs and assigns, in fee-simple, such number of acres of land as the payments already made by the said John Cleves Symmes, his agents or associates, under their contract of the fifteenth day of October one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight,9 will pay for, estimating the lands at two thirds of a dollar per acre, and making the reservations specified in the said contract. And be it further enacted, that the President be and he hereby is further authorized and empowered, by letters patent as aforesaid, to grant and convey to the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates, and to their heirs and assigns in fee-simple, one other tract of one hundred and six thousand eight hundred and fifty seven acres, with the reservations as aforesaid:—Provided that the said John Cleves Symmes, or his agents or associates, or any of them, shall deliver to the Secretary of the Treasury, within six months, warrants which issued for army-bounty-rights sufficient for that purpose, according to the provision of the resolves of Congress of the twenty third of July,10 and second of October one thousand seven hundred and eighty seven;11 but in case, so many warrants should not be delivered, then the letters patent last aforesaid to be given for such number of acres, as shall be in proportion to the warrants so delivered.12 7 Printed also in 1 Stat. 266-267. «Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess. (House), 574, 578, 581, 583, 590, 591; (Senate), 121, 131, 132, 134. See also petition of Symmes, Aug. 29, 1787, ante, p. 70; A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 126-131; Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 147, 267-268; act of Apr. 12,1792, ante, p. 388. • Not found. See " List of Papers", ante, p. 390, n. 80. 10 Ante, p. 54. 11 The petition from Symmes, Aug. 29,1787, is endorsed as having been referred on Oct. 2 to the Board of Treasury to take order; see ante, p. 71. There is no Continental Congress Journal entry. The agreement, providing for a grant of two million acres, was tentative (Bond, ed., op. cit., p. 9). 12 The President's delay in issuing the patent until Sept. 30,1794, post, p. 492, was due to the failure of Symmes to apply promptly for an alteration of the con- tract with the Board of Treasury as to boundaries, in accordance with the act of Apr. 12,1792, ante, p. 388. See the President's Secretary to Dayton, Nov. 9,
Page 395
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 395 And be it further enacted, that the President be and he is hereby authorized and empowered, by letters patent as aforesaid, to grant and convey unto the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates, their heirs and assigns, in trust for the purpose of establishing an academy and other public schools and seminaries of learning, one compleat township, conformably to an order of Congress of the second of October, one thousand seven hundred and eighty seven, made in consequence of the application of the said John Cleves Symmes, for the purchase of the tract aforesaid.13 And be it further enacted, that the several quantities of land, to be granted and conveyed as aforesaid, shall be included and located within such limits and lines of boundary, as the President may judge expedient, agreeably to an Act passed the twelfth day of April one thousand seven hundred and ninety two, "for ascertaining the bounds of a tract of land purchased by John Cleves Symmes." 14 Jonathan Trumbull Speaker of the House of Representatives Richard Henry Lee— President pro tempore of the Senate. Approved May fifth 1792. G° Washington— President of the United States I certify that this Act did originate in the House of Representatives. John Beckley—Clerk. AN ACT RESPECTING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TERRITORIES [SD: Original Statutes 1«] [May 8, 1792] An Act respecting the Government of the territories of the United States, North West and South of the river Ohio.1* Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled, that the laws of the territory 1792, post, p. 414; the report of Senate committee, Apr. 29,1802; and that of the Attorney General, Jan. 26, 1803, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 126-131. i» See petition of Aug. 29, 1787, ante, p. 70, and "statement of the facts respect- ing the college township," prepared for a committee of the House of Represent- atives, Annals, 1 Cong., 2 sess., 290, first published in the Western Spy and Cincinnati Gazette, Oct. 19, 1803, and reprinted in Bradford (ed.), "The James McBride Manuscripts", Quar. Pub. Hist, and Phil. Soc. Ohio, IV, 6-9. See also the Secretary of State to St. Clair, June 19, 1799, post, ill, 26, and the Secretary of the Treasury to the Secretary of State, Aug. 31, 1799, post., ill, 67. « Ante, p. 388; see also the act of Mar. 3,1801, 2 Stat. 112-114. "»Printed in 1 Stat. 285-286. "See Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 140, 527, 601.
Page 396
396 TERRITORIAL PAPERS north-west of the river Ohio, that have been or hereafter may be enacted by the Governor and Judges thereof, shall be printed under the direction of the Secretary of State, and two hundred copies thereof, together with ten sets of the Laws of the United States, shall be delivered to the said Governor and Judges, to be distributed among the inhabitants for their information, and that a like number of the Laws of the United States shall be delivered to the Governor and Judges of the territory south-west of the river Ohio.17 And be it further enacted, that the Governor and Judges of the territory north-west of the river Ohio shall be, and hereby are author- ized to repeal their laws by them made, whensoever the same may be found to be improper.18 And be it further enacted, that the official duties of the Secretaries of the said territories shall be under the control of such laws, as are or may be in force in the said territories. And be it further enacted, that any one of the supreme or superior Judges of the said territories, in the absence of the other Judges, shall be and hereby is authorized to hold a court. And be it further enacted, that the Secretary of State provide proper seals for the several and respective public offices in the said territories. And be it further enacted, that the Limitation-Act, passed by the Governor and Judges of the said territory, the twenty-eighth day of December, one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight,18 be and hereby is disapproved. And be it further enacted, that the expenses incurred by John Cleves Symmes and George Turner, two of the Judges of the said territory, in sending an express, and in purchasing a boat to go the Circuit, in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety, shall be liquidated by the officers of the Treasury, and paid out of the Treasury of the United States. Jonathan Trumbull Speaker of the House of Representatives. Richard Henry Lee — President pro-tempore of the Senate. Approved May Eighth 1792. G° Washington— President of the United States I certify, that this Act did originate in the House of Representa- tives. John Beckley,—Clerk. 17 The reason for this provision may be found in the report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, ante, p. 323. That part of the territorial law of June 22, 1791, which related to the duty of the clerk of the legislature to publish the laws was repealed Aug. 1, 1792 (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvn, 43-44, 87, 88). See also Journal Exec. Procs., Jan. 16, 1793, post, III, 397. 18 Cf. ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 42. 19 Pease (ed.), op. cit., pp. 25-26.
Page 397
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 397 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers: C »] Pittsburgh, June 7th, 1792. My Dear Sir:—Since I wrote you last I have been favored with two letters from you21 for which I am the more obliged to you, that I had in truth but too little deserved them; but I beg you to believe that if I have not written to you I have not forgotten you, neither will I forget you. What between the ill state of my health which, Thank God! is at length pretty well restored, and the plagues I have met with, I really could not write, and now there is very little I can inform you of. I met with a very gracious reception from the President, and indeed from everybody else, much more so than—considering the issue of the campaign—I had looked for, until that foolish boy Morgan 22 came forward and raised a cry for a little time. It has ceased, however, and they—for he is not at the bottom of the busi- ness—are covered with confusion. I mention nothing to you of the report of the Committee23 because I know you have received it before now. The letter, however, that you were good enough to write respecting Darke and the second one allowing me to make use of them were serviceable to me with the Committee to which they were communicated, and I thank you very sincerely. It may be, however, that they must yet be published, for in some remarks that I made upon the testimony I was obliged to refer to them. Those remarks it was moved in Congress that they should be published, and as the report of the Committee is to be taken up early in the next session I suppose they will be published, and of course those letters. Poor Darke darkened himself sufficiently. You may perhaps have wondered at my resignation. I had two reasons for it; one of them, which I assigned to the President,24 that I was doubtful whether I should be able to go through the fatigues of another campaign was really founded, and it is but about three weeks that I had begun to recover when I was obliged, on private business, to make a turn to this place, which has been of so great use to me that I think I am now perfectly well. The other, and what weighed most with me, I did not assign, was that I saw nothing could be in readiness for the campaign in proper season, consequently the officer command- 20From a typed copy. 21 One, of Mar. 10, 1792, is in the St. Clair Papers (OSL). 22 John Morgan, 1st Infantry, was cited for court martial (the Secretary of War to Wayne, Sept. 21, 1792, Washington Papers, LC) and cashiered, Dec. 31, 1793 (Heitman, comp., Hist. Reg. U.S. Army, I, 726). See also Hodgson to Pickering, Mar. 27, 1792, Pickering Papers (MHS). 2S A.S.P., Mil. Affairs, I, 41-44; Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., app., 1310-1317. 24 In a letter of Mar. 26, 1792, ante, p. 376.
Page 398
398 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ing would be forced to attempt the business when there was little probability of success or to defer it entirely, either of which would expose him to much censure which I did not choose again to en- counter—a new General may get over it—one who had been before unsuccessful must have sunk under it. I cannot tell you when I shall visit the western country. If I can obtain permission, my private affairs would require my being here for some time, but as I shall soon return to Philadelphia I will write you again from thence when I shall better know how the case may be, and I will send you some part at least of the observations before the Committee. Bye the by, it was a sad Committee. The only fair men upon it were Sedgwick and Fitzsimmons and Vining—and Sedgwick attended but one day, Vining very seldom. The rest were under the strongest prejudices against me for which I believe I am indebted to the good offices of our friend, the J . . . e,26 who was very intimate with some of them. I was happy enough, however, to overcome their prejudices and some of them were candid enough to acknowledge that they had laid very strong hold of them. There are some expectations of an accommodation with the savages. I wish it may take place but do not think this is the time to propose it, but our Indian war is very unpopular, and another attempt to put an end to it by negociation seems to have been forced upon the Executive. Farewell—Believe me ever, dear Sir, Yours sincerely and affection- ately, A. St. Clair I ought to write to General Wilkinson. If it be possible, excuse me to him for not doing it. Tell him I'll make it up another time—at present it is impossible. ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [OHS: Sargent Papers: C] Fort Washington June 9th 1792 My Dear Sir I enclose you Copies of my three last Letters29 which passed through the wilderness—I do not know but that I ought to have tendered my Services to have performed the Duties of Adjt Gen1 &c° if it should have been necessary until another appointment but you may be assured that if this was proper the Omission has arisen in no Deficiency of Inclination to promote as much as possible 25 Judge Symmes? "June 1 (two letters), and May 17, 1792, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 399
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 399 the public Interests and military Service particularly—Perhaps if the Commanding General arrives he may direct Montres to those Duties, but upon a Presumption that you may not be acquainted with His littleness of Capacity for even very trifling Concerns I should hold myself culpable if I did not express to you an opinion that he is the veriest Blockhead in Creation with a Vanity and mischievious Imper- tinence that can be exceeded only by his supreme Ignorance—He dashes at every thing without knowing anything and stepping out of Line of the military ventures sometimes to preach such Doctrine to the Inhabitants of this Territory as has been calculated to make weak men seditious and should have been noticed in a very summary way would my Informants have inclined to come forward—Col Hodgsdon who knows much of him has made me some Communications and tells me that he is at present very much engaged in persuading the Army that my military appointments has been recd in great Disgust beyond the mountains and particularly in Philadelphia while the Fool at the same Time is treating me with fairest Face—And that I believe to be his Rule of Conduct for all Characters whatever— Will you give me Leave my Dear Sir again to mention Doctor Brown27 to you as a man of great humanity and Attention in his Profession and who is very desirous of continuing in the Army, but holding the office of Surgeon last Campaign he feels himself degraded in the appointment as a mate and quits—His Assiduity Education and knowledge of the mathematics would well qualify him as an Artillerist, which if it might be consistent to commission him in that Line and permit him to be Surgeons Mate also I am persuaded would be highly gratifying to him—Might it not Sir be proper Economy in some Instances—where there are small Garrisons in unhealthy Climates to indulge this Deviation of common Rule? I will only take the Liberty to add, that the Army wants very much men of Doctor Brown's Assiduity as Surgeons.— Upon the Subject of the Powder of last Campaign which in one Instance was complained of to me by a Major Clerk, I believe Col Hodgsdon will produce to you some additional Certificates of its goodness-—It may very easily I think be conceived that it was very good at Philadelphia Pittsburgh and this Place and that some of it might have been otherwise in action for even at the military store where great Care was observed the frequent Rains must have damaged it upon the march, and when once it was issued out to the soldiers it was immediately most shamefully neglected—Notwithstanding pointed and reiterated Orders upon this Subject I scarcely ever was "Dr. Charles Brown, of Pennsylvania, surgeon in levies of 1791 (Heitman, comp., Hist. Reg. U.S. Army, I, 250). In 1792 he was sent on a peace mission to the Miami Indians (Buell, ed., Memoirs Putnam, p. 262).
Page 400
400 TERRITORIAL PAPERS upon the grand Parade that I had not cause of very great Complaint from the waste and Inattention to ammunition— The Report of the Committee of Congress for Inquiry &cc has I perceive come very hard upon Col Hodgsdon—It Appears to me that Every Person acquainted intimately with his Conduct in the office of Qr Gen1 must do him the Justice to acknowledge that at least he was very indefatigable in the Discharge of the Duties thereof and he cer- tainly has been one of the most rigid Economists of public Monies and Property that I ever was acquainted with—his Office however appears to me an Arduous one and I know of no military or Civic Appoint- ment that I deem as difficult to be discharged in Propriety as that of Qr Master General or that I should with so much Diffidence to under- take—I have had my Dear Sir and expect still to be subjected to Difficulties in my Endeavours to preserve Harmony between the civic and Military in this Country—you know there will always be some young men in Military Life and amongst the Citizens are characters void of Probity and Consideration—A Prosecution has been Com- menced by one Blanchard & Smith at the Instance of two Army Certifiers against a Mr Harrison for some Stripes inflicted by his Direction under the Prescription of Gen1 Wilkinsons Orders—'tis not for me to judge of the Propriety of those Orders but I know that as those men had voluntarily subjected themselves to martial Law their Redress ought to be through that channel—and upon application of Gen1 Wilkinson devised means to lay aside the Suit—Blanchard and Smith I believe to be bad Characters—the former very vile but he had some how or other by the Imprudence of the Clerk 28 of the Court become possessed of the Court Records and presumed to issue Precepts in his own Name as the Clerk—This man is a practicing Attorney which, in itself independant from the Consideration of his being noto- riously unprincipled, would render it very improper to vest him with Authority to issue Precepts and institute Suits at Law upon which his Existence depends— A Statute of the Territory declares that any Person presuming to exercise Powers &c° to which by Law he is not authorized shall be deemed guilty of Usurpation and Fined not exceeding one hundred Dollars 29—As the Ordinance of Congress vests me & me alone at present with the Authority of making all officers 30 and this man had never recd my Commission I conceived him guilty of Usurpation and have desired Judge Symmes to proceed against him accordingly.31 In S8 Israel Ludlow. *> A law respecting crime and punishments, enacted Sept. 6, 1788 (Pease, ed. Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvn, 19). Act of Aug. 7, 1789, ante, p. 203. 81 See Sargent to Symmes, June 4 and June 13, and to Wilkinson, June 4,1792, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 376-380; Symmes to Sargent, June 30,1792, post, p. 402.
Page 401
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 401 the mean while appointing a Gentleman of Discretion to discharge the Duties of the Clerk of the Court until the Return of Mr. Ludlow who had been appointed to that office by the Governour and I am in hopes that there will be an End to vexatious Suits and Prosecutions—but I expect a violent Representation of the Business may be transmitted to you and perhaps many public officers—I can I know justify myself, but the misfortune is that such Complaints are sometimes made and tho' not deemed by the Persons receiving them of sufficient conse- quence to demand or authorize an Investigation yet capable to effect and prejudice their minds against the Person complained of and do him consequently material Injury—I shall however continue with out Dread of Issue to discharge all my Duties according to the best of my Abilities and If I err tho' I may subject myself to Censure I shall have the Consciousness that my Heart is not in Fault With great Respect I am your affectionate Winthrop Sargent Honh1" Gen1 Knox THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE SYMMES [SD:Amer. Letters, iv:C] Philadelphia June 22. 1792. To John Cleves Symmes Esqr Sir The several articles of your letter of January 25.32 which were proper for Legislative provision, were put into a proper channel for their notice and have been provided for, as far as they judged expedi- ent by the 19th 30th and 42d chapters of the laws of the late Session.33 Your letter of January 27.34 was laid before the President, and he permitted me to inform you that explicit orders are given to the Military in the North western territory to consider themselves as subordinate to the civil power on every occasion where the civil has legal authority to interfere, and this I believe may be counted on for observance.35 We are proceeding in the printing the laws of the North western territory,39 and seals for the same territory shall be provided whenever it shall be known what seals are wanting. I am Sir &° Th: Jefferson. » Not found. » Acts of Apr. 12, May 5 and 8, 1792, ante, pp. 388, 394, 395. « Not found. 35 See Symmes to Boudinot and Dayton, Jan. 25, 1792 (Bond, ed., Corr. J. C. Symmeg, pp. 159-162). 39 In accordance with the act of May 8, 1792, ante, p. 395. 128650—34 27
Page 402
402 TERRITORIAL PAPERS JUDGE SYMMES TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers :ALS] June the 30th 1792: Northbend. Sir I have the honor this moment to receive your letter of the 13th 37 wherein you pursue the subject of your favor of the 4th Instant38 which was handed to me by Mr Blanchard39 in company with Mr Smith those gentlemen whom you reprehend for instituting an action against ensign Harrison at the suit of the two artificers.40 Your honor and general Wilkinson are undoubtedly right in your opinions that the artificers of an army are subject to Martial law and the orders of the commanding officer—but the previous question "an artificer, or no artificer"? is most surely the province of a court of justice to determine when such a question arises in the common course of law. Mr Smith and Blanchard was not well advised when they brought the Action, and had they applied to me before the issuing of the writ, for my opinion, I should certainly have discountenanced it—But after the writ issued and was in the hands of the sheriff, had Mr Harrison consulted me for information touching his duty in such a case, I should have advised him to sign his appearance to the writ, and at the next term come into court and moved for a non-suit, which the court would certainly have granted with costs on his shewing the court that the plaintiffs were engaged as artificers to the army in the service of the United States. This would have been the most eligible way of triumphing over the offending artificers. Mr Harrison might have had another legal remedy if he did not chuse to submit himself to the adjudication of the court of common pleas (tho I doubt not but that, he would have been discharged by that court and recovered his costs which might have been deducted out of the artificers pay) he might have brought his writ of Habeas corpus cum causa which I would have allowed him, to remove the cause altogether into the general court, where I think he could not have failed. And even a third measure might have been pursued before the service of the writ, which would have been for Mr Harrison to have sued out his writ of supersedeas in the general court, which I would likewise have allowed him on shewing the engagement of the artificers in the army service, and this writ would have legally over- taken the other and tied up the hands of the sheriff, so that he could not serve the writ issued from the court below until the writ of super- sedeas was discharged and a procedendo awarded by the general w Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 379. »8 Ibid., p. 377. M John Blanchard, clerk of the territorial legislature, June 22, 1791; ibid., p. 347. 40 See Sargent to the Secretary of War, June 9, 1792, ante, p. 398.
Page 403
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 403 court. But Sir, before I had the smallest notice of the unhappy altercation, it appears that matters had arisen to a very disagreeable situation, all I could do however for the present, was to advise Mr Smith to suspend farther proceedings in the action and to lift the writ out of the hand of the sheriff, this he had a right to do as attorney for the plaintiffs, and this he promised me he would do on his return to Cincinnata. Here I wished the matter to die away altogether, and the validity of the writ as well as the propriety of making resistance to its being served forever kept from adjudication, as such Jostleings of the execu- tive, judicial, and military powers are always pregnant with evils. I also proceeded sir, when Mr Blanchard came down with your letter of the fourth, to examine him relative to his officiating as clerk of the court of common pleas for the County of Hamilton; He assured me that Mr Israel Ludlow the principal in the office had assigned him his deputy, and had presented him to the judges and justices of the County courts; that they had sitting the Courts recognised him as such and had caused him to be enrolled in that capacity on their records. This information of Mr Blanchard's being true, a question arises how far his deputation is legal? The rule of law generally is, that officers holding judicial trusts cannot create a deputy—but such officers as are merely ministerial and under responsibility for the due execution of their trusts, may appoint a deputy to do the duties of their office; the superior being answerable for his subordinate. But as this question was not judicially before me, and the responsibility of Mr Ludlow to government not set forth, as well as the necessary interrogatories having never been taken of the justices of the courts below nor of any other person, in the case; I thought it prudent to suspend farther inquiry until the sitting of the Court of Oyer and Terminer for the trial of the murderers now in custody, which I intend to hold so soon as I receive from the secretary of state the law which authorises one judge of the Territory to hold a court. Of this law I have been in daily expectation for several weeks past—and as your letter sir of the 4th Instant did not require any immediate answer, added to my then indisposed situation in point of health, and extreme multiplicity of business since I have got the better of my illness I have omitted the honor of writing to you on the subject till the receipt of your second letter this day. I hope sir that you will not expect from me a full discussion of all the points contained in your two letters; or an explicit opinion touch- ing them; this would cut out more cogitation for me than I have lei- sure at present to indulge; and fill more sheets than I am able to pen in such sufocating weather as we now have. I will only add at present, that it is the undoubted province of the governor to appoint the officers of a county, but how far he may con-
Page 404
404 TERRITORIAL PAPERS stitutionally hold the power of displacing, or removing characters from office is a question of moment not yet settled. This question in the person of the president of the United States lately convulsed the nation not a little, and a law of Congress was deemed necessary to define his powers herein. One inconvenience seems to arise from the appoint- ment of Mr Swan41 previous to the sitting of the County-courts in August next. Writs issuing out of the Court of common pleas are always tested some day of the last preceeding term. Mr Blanchard as Mr Ludlows deputy whether de jure or only de facto, was certainly the acting clerk through last may term: and should Mr Swan's name appear to writs issuing as of the last term, some impropriety would seem involved.42 I have the honor to be sir, with every sentiment of respect. Your most obedient servant, John Cleves Symmes. Honh1" Mr Secretary Sargent. [Endorsed] June 30th 1792 Judge Symmes ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [OHS: Sargent Papers :C] Cincinnati July the 6th 1792. My dear Sir. Some accounts of Indian Expenses will be presented to you probably by Major Vanderburgh, and which are represented to me to be very Enormous.43 I have reason to believe that great abuses have been committed in the Department at Vincennes, and Shall im- mediately write to Major Hamtranck to cause an Inquiry and present me with all the information he can obtain—Major Vanderburgh wished me to examine those Accounts, but as the Transactions were all during the Governour's presence in the Territory, I declined it. And indeed, I feel myself very much at a loss how to conduct myself in Indian Affairs. The Acts & Resolves of Congress Appear to me to have constituted the Governour, Superintendent ex officio—and required of me (or I mistake them) to discharge all the duties in his Absence. But the Instructions given to general Wilkinson upon this Subject,44 and the 41 Samuel Swan, appointed clerk of the court June 7, 1792; see Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 378. 42 See order of Acting Governor Sargent to the sheriff of Hamilton County, June 7, 1792, ibid., p. 379, and letters to the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, Aug. 7, 1792, ibid., p. 382, and to Abner Dunn, U. S. Attorney, Aug. 9, 1792, ibid., p. 383. « Mar. 31, 1791, Sargent Papers (MHS). 44 Not found.
Page 405
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 405 late Mission of Gen1 Putnam,45 leave me strangely at a loss how to determine. The Indian Goods &cc subject to my Controul, and committed to a Storekeeper here by Mr. Hodgdon (with the approbation of the Governour I suppose) have been directed by that gentleman to be delivered to General -Putnam in consequence of an order of your's received upon the Ohio river as he was ascending it. I have told the Store keeper that this Order from the War office Should have been presented to me—that from Inclination and Duty I was perfectly disposed to promote by every possible means the Intentions of Government and would upon Application give him directions to deliver over all the Indian Goods to General Putnam. The enclosed letter from Major Hamtranck481 shall communicate to General Putnam. If he is the Superintendent of Indian Affairs, it Should have been addressed to him, but I suppose the Major has not been informed upon this Subject. I humbly conceive Sir, that very great inconvenience and even Injury might accrue to the public from the want of proper informa- tion—but you may rest perfectly assured that no exertions of mine will be wanting to prevent it. With great respect and Attachment I have the honour to be your most obedient Humble Servant. Honh1" Gen1 Knox Secretary at War [Endorsed] Cincinnati July 6 1792 Col. Sargent (private) recd 4. Augt 1792 _____ SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT fSD:N.W. Terr. Papers, I-A:C] Cincinnati County of Hamilton and Territory of the United States North west of the River Ohio. July the 6th 1792. Sir, I do myself the honour to transmit by Major Vigo,47 a copy from the public records of the Territory of the United States, north west of the river Ohio, to the 30°* of June inclusive.48 u See the Secretary of War to Putnam, May 5, 1792 (Buell, ed., Memoirs Putnam, p. 257), announcing his appointment as Brigadier General. Detailed instructions of May 22, ibid., pp. 257-267, embody plans for negotiation of a treaty with the Wabash and neighboring Indians. This document is likewise printed in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 234-236. See also Putnam to the Secretary of War, June 5,1792, and his speech to the Indians of the same date, Buell (ed.), op. ext., pp. 267-271; the Secretary of War to the President, Aug. 16,1792, post, p. 408. «• Mar. 31, 1792, Sargent Papers (MHS). See also Hamtramck to the Secre- tary of War, of the same date, ante, p. 380, concerning articles of agreement with the Wabash Indians and protection to American traders in their competition with the British. 47 Francis Vigo. 49 Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 380 et seq.
Page 406
406 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The long absence of two of the judges from the Government, has prevented the adoption of laws for more than the six months last past, which is considered and lamented as a very great misfortune to the territory— Since closing my official communications sir, Major Vigo has pre- sented to me the enclosed petition from the 'people of Vincennes which I beg leave to lay before Congress.49 Observing that the petitioners are generally in very indigent circum- stances—much attached to the United States, and that the whole expense of resurveying their ancient possessions, will, by an estimate of the surveyor, amount to about one thousand dollars. With every sentiment of the highest respect, I have the honour to be Sir, Your most obedient, and most devoted servant, Winthrop Sargent The President of The United States. ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [OHS : Sargent Papers : C»°] Cincinnati July 12th, 1792 I have made my Dear Sir for you in great Haste the enclosed rExtracts from some late Dispatches— I have long been persuaded that the Indians (many of them) about the Lakes and the Illinois might be detached from the Nations at War And I believe a man of address upon the Mississippi would not only produce this good but in some considerable Degree influence the Spaniards to prevent an improper Countenance being shown by them to our Enemies Mayet mentioned in Lagesse's" Speech is a most essential Scoundrel but necessary absolutely to Government and there is nothing too daring for the Rascal to Undertake—I know him well and Commissioned him by advice of the Governour because we Knew if he was not for us he would be most decidedly against us— The Indians very much fear him— Col Hamilton promised me when in Philadelphia to report upon a Petition of mine that was refered to him for Compensation whilst discharging the Duties of Governour in this Territory and which has accumulated my Expenses in a manner very serious to myself—I had « Not found. 50 Not a contemporary copy. After the copy of the endorsement is a note, "Copied from the Daveis Papers." 51 Chief of the Potawatami Indians. For note on Mayet, see report of Feb. 10, 1791, ante, p. 333.
Page 407
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 407 Encouragement not only from him but the Secretary of State that there was no Doubt of proper Provision being made for me upon this Business but I hear nothing more of it—If without too much Trouble you can satisfy me whether Col Hamilton will or not report upon the Petition I shall esteem it a very great Favour62—I have presumed twice to write to him upon the Subject63 but he has not been good enough to respond I know the multiplicity & magnitude of his Avocations or suppose they may be immense but nevertheless I must wish that 1 may be informed whether he has or will report to Congress and I conceive I may presume to ask it— Be pleased to present my most respectful Compliments to Mrs Knox believe me with most respectful Attachment & Esteem Dear Sir Your obedient and very humble Servant Private Winthrop Sargent Honh1" General Knox Secretary of War Philadelphia [Endorsed] Col1 Sargent July 12th 1792 private x THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [ M HS: Sargent Papers: LS] War department July 23d 1792 Sir Your several favours of the 10th of April M and 16 of May55 have been duly received. It is to be hoped that the party at Gallipolis is sufficient for the protection of the settlement, and that the other settlements are as well protected as the nature of the case may require and also the settlements below. If however it should appear otherwise, you are hereby authorized in the absence of the Governor to call out such portions of militia as shall be indispensibly necessary for the defensive protection of any settlement in the territory of the United States North West of the Ohio 56 It is presumed that a just regard to your own character will induce a discreet exercise of this power. 52 See report of the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 31, 1794, post, p. 473. 53 See Sargent to the President, Aug. 1, 1790, ante, p. 295, and Dec. 30, 1793, post, p. 463. 54 Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 373. M Not found. M See Journal Exec. Procs., Sept. 17,1792, post, ill, 384; Sargent to the Secretary of War, Dec. 13, 1792, ibid., p. 388.
Page 408
408 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The militia called out, or to be called out (excepting the scouts or spies so termed) to be on the pay and rations of the troops of the United States, without any allowance for Clothing The militia to be mustered on the entrance and termination of their service. I shall direct Major General Wayne to order escorts to the Governor, or Secretary acting as such in the absence of the Governor, or the judges of the Western Territory when on public business and when the said escorts can be furnished consistently with the public service 67— While the pacific overtures to the hostile Indians are pending, offensive operations against them ought to be prevented either by any of the people of the Western Territory, or any other persons from the South eastern side of the River. The conduct of the party mentioned in your letter of the tenth of May to Judge Symmes,58 has been noticed to Brigadier General Wil- kinson and he is particularly instructed thereon. Your letter of the 16th of May announcing that you decline the office of Adjutant and Inspector General has given me great pain—I have communicated your decision to the President of the United States who is in Virginia The military bill was long detained by discussions in Congress—It was intended by the Executive that the Adjutant General should have had the rank of Lieutenant Colonel—but in the collisions which happened in the passage of the bill it was struck out and it was afterwards judged inexpedient to attempt to restore it. I lament the circumstance, as it has prevented the public from receiving your aid in so important a station, for which your talents in my judgment eminently fitted you— I have the honor to be Sir with great esteem Your humble servant. H Knox Secy of War Winthrop Sargent Esqr [Endorsed] Secretary at War July 23d to Col. Winthrop Sargent N° 13 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers: LS] War department August 16 1792 Sir I have the honor to submit a copy of a Letter from Brigadier See Wilkinson to Sargent, Dec. 10, 1792, Sargent Papers (MHS). 58 Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 375.
Page 409
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 409 General Putnam of the 14th Ultimo;59 & another of the same date from Brigadier General Wilkinson containing enclosures,60 and I shall transmit copies of the several papers which have been received, to Major General Wayne, as I concieve it highly proper for him to be informed of every thing relative to the objects of his command. I confess I think the accuracy of the information of the prisoners to be questioned—their sphere of observation must have been very small indeed—I think however there cannot be a doubt about Trueman. We may expect to hear of the reception of Captain Hendricks daily, as he probably arrived at the Miami River of Lake Erie about the latter end of June. That the Shawanese and some others are inveterate, I have no doubt, but I think if they have fairly explained to them the ample message sent by Trueman, that the mass of the hostile Indians will probably accede to a Treaty—But in any event the Executive of the United States will be considered by all impartial and moderate men as having taken every rational expedient to bring matters to an amicable termination.61 I intimated to General Wayne some time since that the lateness of the Season would probably render it inexpedient to employ any Chickesaws or Choctaws this year. I have the honor to transmit a copy of my letter to Governor Blount of the 15 instant.62 The affairs in the South Western quarter are in a very ill position if Colonel Arthur Campbells letter is to be entirely credited—I have the honor to enclose a copy of his Letter to Lieut Governor Wood who transmitted it to me. 59Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 295-297; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 240. The correct date is July 16; the original letter has disappeared. See additional letters from Putnam to the Secretary of War, detailing the progress of the mission, July 11, 22 and 26, 1792, Buell (ed.), op. cU., pp. 292-295, 301-304, 308-309; similarly, letters to Wayne, July 10, 1792, ibid., pp. 291-292; to Wilkinson, July 21 and 23; from Wilkinson to Putnam, July 21, 1792, ibid., pp. 299-301, 304-305; and to Hamtramck, July 24, 1792, ibid., pp. 305-307. See also the President to the Secretary of War, Aug. 22, 1792, infra. 80 Not found. 81 See instructions to Capt. Alexander Trueman, Apr. 3, 1792, A.S.P., op. ext., pp. 229-230. Trueman was sent to the Miami Indians on a mission of peace, similar to that of Putnam, ibid., p. 234. Trueman and his party were murdered by the Indians, who carried to Detroit his instructions and the speeches which were to have been delivered to the Indians, whence they were forwarded to British officials by Col. R. G. England, British commandant (England to Thomas Talbot, Aug. 28, 1792, Cruikshank, ed., Simeoe Papers, I, 206). See also Wilkinson to Col. John Harden, May 20, 1792 (Mich. Hist. Colls., xxiv, 414-416). This letter contains instructions to Harden who was to act in conjunction with Trueman. « A.S.P., op. eit., p. 258.
Page 410
410 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Governor of Virginia set out on the 25. Ultimo for the South Western frontier. Since writing the above I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favour of the 13 instant64—the letter of General Putnam 65 relative to the post on the Muskingum and the Fish Carriers66 Speech are now enclosed I have the honor to be with the greatest respect Your most obedt servt H Knox The President of the United States THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Washington Papers :D] Mount Vernon Augt22 1792 Dear Sir, In my letter of the 15th 97 I acknowledged the receipt of yours of the 11th;68 since which your dispatches of the 16th are come to hand, and convey but a gloomy prospect of peace with the Indians, in either hemisphere. but then the necessity of preparing more vigorously if possible for the dernier resort. That the Western Indians are stimulated to acts of hostility on one side and every mean which can be devised to set aside the treaties wch exist between the Southern Indians and the U. States & to encourage the former to break with us on the other admits of no doubt in my mind; and that it may be a concerted plan between cert" Powers to check the growth of this rising Country, is far from improbable—diabolical as it may seem.— The enclosure of Gen1 Putnams letter of the 9th of July,69 enables me (which I could not do before) to form some idea of his proposition to establish a Post on the Muskingham; and though I shall give no decided opinion on this particular case, my sentiments, generally, with respect to Posts, are not changed—and are shortly these. that except for the preservation of Stores, and the security of convoys M Ford (ed.), Writings Washington, XII, 155-156. M Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 290-291. M Chief of the Cayuga nation. See letter from Gen. Israel Chapin to the Secretary of War, July 17, 1792, t&td., pp. 316-320. "Sparks (ed.), Writings Washington, x, 275-278. M Not found. 98 Buell (ed.), op. cit., pp. 290-291. See also Putnam to the Secretary of War, July 8, Aug. 16 and 21, 1792, ibid., pp. 280-290, 321-324, 325-326; to Wayne, June 23, July 10, and Aug. 6, 1790, ibid., pp. 271-272, 291-292, 311-312; Wayne to Putnam, Aug. 6, 1792, ibid., pp. 311-312; the Secretary of War to Putnam, Aug. 7, 1792, ibid., pp. 313-316; Hamtramck to Putnam, Aug. 9 and 31, 1792, t&td., pp. 320-321, 327; and the Secretary of War to the President, Aug. 16, 1792, ante, p. 408. Putnam's letters are found in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 238-241.
Page 411
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 411 upon communi" they are of no use but to protect the people within them—for unless the Garrison is of such strength, & can detach in such force, as to bid defiance to the enemy it is always cooped up.— Except for the purposes I have mentioned, of what advantage are Forts Hamilton, St Clair & Jefferson?—70 The strength of Stationary parties are soon discovered by the Indians and when discovered, are liable to be cut off, unless they confine themselves solely to the defence of the Post—& of what avail would this be on the Muskingham or elsewhere?—Posts can be insulted or avoided at the option of the enemy in a covered Country—but the best vigilence of the most cautious Ene[my] cannot prevent scouting parties falling on their trail.—Besides, we shall never be respectable at any point if the Troops are divided, & subdivided for the quietude of particular settlements or neighbourhoods:—nor will they ever be disciplined, and under due subordination whilst they are scattered over the Country in small parties under subaltern Officers; except when they are employed in Ranging, which is an essential part of their Military educat" in the Service for which they are designed.— If all the measures which have been pursued by Governmt to convince the hostile Indians of the just & honorable intention of the U States towards them should prove ineffectual we may certainly calculate upon a powerful opposition from this combind force; in which case, we shall not only be unprepared to penetrate their Coun- try, this Year, but there appears to me to be very little prospect of doing it early in the next; unless there can be some stimulus to the recruiting Service;—and the Officers absolutely restrained from en- listing improper men—for I am told, notwithstanding the pointed instructions which have been issued to them on this head, that boys in many instances, and the worst miscreants in others are received: to the last of which may be attributed the number of desertions that are reported to the War Office.—Under this view of the matter, your intimation to Gen1 Wayne respecting the Chicasaws and Choctaws was prudent & proper; but I conceive, nevertheless, if a few of each South- ern Nation say a six or 8 respectable characters was to visit & remain with the army as long as should be agreeable to themselves—Be well fed & cloathed—& in all respects treated with attention & kindness, it would be an effectual inducement to the coming of the number that might be required next year? I perceive by Mr Belli"71 letter that the difference between supply- ing the Troops with their Rations by Contract, and by a purchasing Commy must be very great indeed, although he has not given the Wages, & other charges of the latter gentry.—I am of opinion that the 70 A list of forts in the United States, with locations, is in Heitman (comp.), Hist. Reg. U.S. Army, II, 475-559. 71 Deputy quartermaster general, April, 1792; resigned, Nov. 8,1794, ibid., I,209.
Page 412
412 TERRITORIAL PAPERS difference in favor of the latter will be found from the nature of things much greater on the exterior than it would be in the interior Country— and as the public pay for all lost provisions (by the enemy) is at the expence of Stores Guards &ca it is a matter worthy of serious investi- gation & consequent decision.—Consult therefore with the Secretary of the treasury, & act as the result shall appear best The hair must have stood on Major S—head,72 & a stake full in his view, when his letter of the 8th of July was writing to Gen1 Wilkinson, or the style of it would certainly have been varied.—With esteem & regard I am—D Sir Yr* &c» G W MAJr Gen1 Knox—Secy of War. [Endorsed] To The Secrety of War 22d Augt 179273 REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Misc. Letters :ALS] [October 29, 1792] The Secretary of State has had under consideration the Report of the proceedings of the Secretary of the Territory of the U. S. North West of the Ohio in the absence of the Governor from January the 18t to June 30th 1792. and Reports to the President of the United States that there is nothing con- tained therein which requires any thing to be done on the part of the President of the United States Th: Jefferson Oct. 29. 1792. [Endorsed] Report of the Secretary of State on the proceedings of the Executive department of the governnt N. Wl of the Ohio Oct. 29th 1792. SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [MHS:Knox Papers:ALS] Private Cincinnati October 29th 1792 My Dear Gen1 Captain Mayette 74 will hand you a Letter of Introduction—he has been commissioned by me in this Country not only from the recommendations of the Governour and the high Confi- dence placed in him apparantly (which can be evinced to you by the Copy of Instructions refered to in the Letter Which he bears) but ™ Ballard Smith, major, 1st U.S. Infantry, June 2, 1792, ibid., p. 894. n See the Secretary of War to the President, Nov. 7, 1792, post, p. 414. » See report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, ante, p. 333, n. 31; St. Clair to Mayet, June 1, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 309.
Page 413
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 413 from what I deemed proper policy—for if he is not for us he will be decidedly against us—and his Influence is very considerable amongst the Indians not only upon the Illionois but with the Kickapoos and I believe also with many other hostile Tribes—he is a most daring fellow and has obtained and maintained his Consequence by the "Ultimo ratio"—at divers Times and places he has cut & been cut down in Contests for Sovereignty by the tawney Sons of this Country and I am confident they stand much in Awe of him—The British and Span- iards I have no Doubt would purchase him at a considerable price and but for the flattering Distinctions we have paid him he probably would have struck up a Bargain—He has as I have observed to you a Com- mission and I understand some Idea that pay is or ought to be annexed to it and probably Governt might Find it for their Interest so to estab- lish the matter. La Chase75 is a very sad Dog also living upon the Illinois at an impor- tant point capable & willing of mischief but has lived without creating much Complaint since the Governour was upon the Mississippi—It appears to me that it would be good policy to purchase him too—of the other Indians I know nothing "Ducoine" excepted—he talks of his Kaskaskians but in fact they can only be hunted up in other worlds For I do not imagine a Doz" of them are to be found in this—I believe him of no Consequence or Influence and he is a monstrous beggarly rascal even for an Indian and an Arrent Paltroon—Knowing thus much of those Characters I thought it incumbent on me Officially & confidentially to mention it to you for they are all my very good Friends— I shall not presume to say any thing upon this indian Treaty even in a private Letter For public Servants are to be silent upon public measures—my Friend Mr Heckenwelder has I believe rendered every Service he could upon the Occasion and as I am informed indeed been the Treaty maker.—My Opinions, nor no mans Opinions will I am per- suaded every biass or influence Yours unless supported by much & good Authority but in Confidence I shall venture to believe and to declare to you that from the Knowledge which you may acquire of this Business you will be induced to think Gen1 Putnam better calcu- lated for all other Services than Indian treaty making—you will not condemn me for thus expressing myself to you—it is to you alone and I have a very great Respect for the Talents which he possesses— If Governour Sl Clair is in Philadelphia I shall be sorry that I have expressed myself to you respecting the Indians because he knew them as well as Mayette—as he might not be there I wished my Dear Sir to impart to you all I knew of them— I am my Dear Sir with much Attachment very respectfully & affectionately yours W. Sargent « See proclamation, Dec. 8, 1793, post, p. 460.
Page 414
414 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :LS] War—department, Nov: 7th 1792. Sir. I have the honor to submit to you, the pleasing information of a treaty with the Wabash indians;78 and which appears to have been a general one. After you shall have perused them, they shall be copied, to be laid before the two houses. Mr Bradshaw says, there were upwards of seven hundred indians present—He came by the way of Kentucky, and says that he under- stood that about twenty people had been killed by the indians at their late several attacks—That they were repulsed at another station, besides Buchannans—That the celebrated John Watts, the indian leader, was shot through both thighs, and the Shawanese warrior was killed with several other indians. I have the honor to be Sir, with very great respect, Your most obedt servt H Knox Secy of War The President of the United States [Endorsed] The Secy of War Novr 7th 1792 TOBIAS LEAR TO JONATHAN DAYTON [SD:Misc. Letters :LPC] Philadelphia Nov* 9th 1792 Sir, In reply to your letter of this date, the President of the United States directs me to inform you, that he is ready to do, at any time, whatever may depend on him towards completing the "grant and Conveyance of certain lands to John Cleves Symmes and his associ- ates," in conformity to An Act of the Legislature passed during the 79 The journal of Putnam's proceedings with the Wabash Indians, Sept. 24-27, 1792, is in Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 335-362; the text of the treaty is found ibid., pp. 363-366, and in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 338. The treaty was submitted by the President to the Senate, in guarded language, Feb. 13, 1793 (Senate, Exec. Journal, I,128), and was considered on Feb. 14, 15, and 26; on Feb. 28 further consideration was postponed until the next session of Congress, pending the procurement of an explanation of art. 4 (ibid., pp. 128, 134, 135); on Jan. 9, 1794, a resolution to ratify was defeated (ibid., p. 146). Correspondence relating to the combined military and political movement against the Wabash Indians from the date of Putnam's appointment as Brigadier General to the conclusion of the negotiations is cited in the Secretary of War to the President, May 15, 1792, Worthington Papers (LC), and Aug. 16, 1792, ante, p. 408, and in the President to the Secretary of War, Aug. 22,1792, ante, p. 410. It has been deemed unnecessary to reprint the numerous papers relating to this episode in view of their availability in the foregoing references.
Page 415
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 415 last session of Congress. But as the President understands that there are certain things in that business which may require legal investi- gation, he thinks it proper that it should come to him through the Attorney General of the United States.77 I have the honor to be very respectfully Sir, Your most Obedt Servt Tobias Lear. Secretary to the President of the United States. Jonathan Dayton Esqr [Endorsed] Jona Dayton Esqr Novr 9th 1792 JONATHAN DAYTON78 TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Philadelphia Novr 9th 1792 Sir, Having delivered to the Secretary of the Treasury, pursuant to the 2nd Section of the Act of Congress entitled "An Act authorizing the grant & conveyance of certain lands to John Cleves Symmes & his associates",79 military warrants sufficient to pay for One hundred. & six thousand eight hundred & fifty seven acres of land, I am prepared, as Agent for, & the associate of, said Symmes to carry into effect the Act before mentioned,80 as well as the one previously passed, entitled "An Act for ascertaining the bounds of a tract of land purchased by John Cleves Symmes",81 so far as the same depends on me. As Mr Ludlow, the surveyor of the Ohio company and Miami pur- chases is now in town on his way to the western territory & as his aid will be very useful, if not necessary, in denning the lines of boundary, I submit it to your consideration sir, whether it would not be advise- able to have him detained a few days for that purpose. I have the honor to be sir with the greatest respect & attachment Your most obedt servt Jona: Dayton The President of the U. States [Addressed] The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Jon1 Dayton Esqr 9th Novr 1792. 77 No communication from the Attorney General on this reference has been found. See acts of Apr. 12, ante, p. 388, and May 5, 1792, ante, p. 394. See also Lear to Dayton, Nov. 20, 1792, post, p. 416. 78 A Representative in Congress from New Jersey, 1791-1799. 78 Ante, p. 394. 80 See Dayton to Judge Symmes, Nov. 19,1792, Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 271-275. For an account of Dayton's connection with Symmes in the land purchase, see ibid., passim. 81 Ante, p. 388.
Page 416
416 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE TURNER [SD:Amer. Letters, iv:C] Philadelphia Novr 9.1792. To Judge Turner Sir It appears from the report of the Secretary of the Territory North west of the Ohio, that several regulations of importance in the present situation of that territory, remain unprovided, on account of the absence of the persons invested with the Legislative powers.82 I am charged by the President to bring this circumstance to your notice, not doubting but that the public exigencies of your office will over- weigh in your mind any personal inconveniencies, which might attend your repairing to that Country. I have the honor to be with great respect and esteem Sir &° Th: Jefferson. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:Amer. Letters, IV:C] Philadelphia Novem* 10.1792. To Govr Sl Clair. Sir The present situation of the Territory North west of the Ohio, requiring the presence of those to whom the administration of its affairs is confided, I am charged by the President to bring this circum- stance to your notice, not doubting but that the public exigencies of your office will over-weigh in your mind any personal inconveniencies which might attend your repairing to that Country. I have the honor to be with sentiments of great and sincere esteem and respect, Sir &e Th: Jefferson. TOBIAS LEAR TO JONATHAN DAYTON [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Philadelphia Novr 20th 1792 In obedience to the President's commands I have the honor to enclose for you, a copy of a letter from the Attorney General of the United States,83 on the subject of your letter to the President of the 9th instant.84 I have the honor to be, very respectfully, Sir, Your most obedt sevt Tobias Lear Secretary to the President of the United States [Jona]than Dayton Esquire— [Endorsed] Nov. 20: 1792 *» See Sargent to the Secretary of War, Nov. 1, 1792, Knox Papers (MHS). ■ Not found. M Ante, p. 415.
Page 417
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 417 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE INHABITANTS OF GALLIPOLIS [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:C] Cincinnati County of Hamilton and Territory of the United States northwest of the Ohio Novr 23d 1792. I have to acknowledge your letter of the 23d ult.85 received a few days since and to reply with that degree of frankness and candour which I trust will ever mark my charactar. In order to make you perfectly acquainted how far and intimately I may have been con- nected in the Land Transactions of which you complain it will be proper to inform you that the revd Mr Cutler and myself were solicited in the year 1787 to attempt the purchase of a Tract of Country within this Government to the value of one million of Dollars for a number of Gentlemen associated under the name of the name of the Ohio com- pany —that upon this occation we so far extended our views at the particular request of Col. William Duer as to ask for, and obtained the preemption of all the Lands from the seventh range of Townships to the Sciota, to the Ohio river and a certain northern boundary, which preemption (with the exception of one million and a half of acres the reserve Lots in the ratio ordered by Congress and two complete Town- ships for the purposes of an University being within the Eighth and seventeenth ranges Ohio River and a given Boundery upon the North) was to be to the benefit of Col. Duer, Mr Cutler and myself and our associates87 Under these circumstances it was agreed upon by the concerned that Royal Flint Esquire should attempt to negotiate this Preemption right in Europe agreeably to such Instructions as he might receive from Mr Cutler and myself.88 Col. Duer was authorized in case of Disability in Mr Flint to appoint another agent89 with our concur- 85 Not found. 86 See indenture between the Board of Treasury and the agents of the Ohio Company, Oct. 27, 1787, ante, p. 80. 87 See indenture between the Board of Treasury and Cutler and Sargent, Oct. 27, 1787, ante, p. 85. 88 The complicated history of the Scioto speculation, with its various domestic and foreign ramifications, has been treated in detail by Hulbert in the following studies: "The Methods and Operations of the Scioto Group of Speculators", Miss. Valley Hist. Rev., I, 502-515, II, 56-73; "Andrew Craigie and the Scioto Associates", Amer. Antiq. Soc. Procs. (new ser.), xxm, pt. 2. These studies are based upon sources found in the Craigie Papers (Amer. Antiq. Soc.), Knox and Pickering Papers (MHS), Scioto Papers (NYHS), Gallipolis Papers (Hist, and Phil. Soc. Ohio), Barlow Papers (Harv. Coll. Lib.), Emmet Papers (N. Y. Pub. Lib.), and Putnam Papers (Marietta Coll. Lib.). The relevant Gallipolis Papers have been printed in Belote (ed.), "Selections from the Gallipolis Papers", Quar. Pub. Hist. and Phil. Soc. Ohio, n, 41-92. w Joel Barlow. 126650—34 28
Page 418
418 TERRITORIAL PAPERS rence but to be governed by our Instructions, and none were ever given to justify the sale of a single Foot of Land, that have come to my Knowledge—we had not bought therefore could not sell—The very instrument you allude to and of which you tell me you have a "legal copy" most explicitly declares this.90 When it was determined to send an agent to Europe the necessary credentials and informations of this country were required I furnished myself a survey of some parts thereof, accurate and descending very much to minutia in order to prevent all possibility of deception there was not a hill or vale in the whole compass of this survey which was not noted and the partic- ular description of soil, timber water courses, &c. annexed—a general map also was made out from the best informations which could be obtained, but never pretended to have been correct. The copy of agreement betwee[n] Duer, Cutler and myself prefaced and founded upon preemption right only—and our agreement with the Board of Treasury obligatory of actual pay met before we could demand a single acre of ground although it is I think there provided that we should obtain Deeds for each sixth part of the soil upon paying the value thereof into the public Treasury: With such Documents, and the express instruction that no considerable pecuniary risk was to be made our agent was to have gone forward—The fortunes of Mr Cutler myself and our associates collectively were poor and inade- quate to hazard—the avowal of this was made to Col. Duer at a considerable meeting of the concerned and a positive Declaration that we would not adventure beyond the sum of 250 £. sterling—the calculation for one equal moiety of an agent's necessary expenses in Europe for one year—if his prospects had been flattering we were at our own option to have made future and further provision for his longer continuance—He was to offer only our preemption right in the aggragate or such proportions as we had agreed to receive and pay for to Congress—Deeds for which were to be executed when we received the purcase money and not till then. No instructions ever were given to Col. Duer to authorize any person in Europe to receive the purchase monies. In a Trust of such magnitude I should have con- sulted all my associates—neither did I ever authorize the continuance of an agent in Europe more than one year or hold myself responsible for expences beyond the above expressed sum of two hundred and fifty pounds which has already I believe been discharged by my attorney. That you are Gentlemen in a very embarrassed situation I can readily conceive and that in equity you should long since have been put in possession of the property you came in quest of—not however in consequence of any engagements of mine—This cannot be admit- "l See transfer from Cutler and Sargent to William Duer, Oct. 29, 1787, Belote (Id.), op. ext., pp. 43-45.
Page 419
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 419 ted—and your candour Gentlemen will I persuade myself from an impartial consideration of the foregoing statement induce you to ac- quit me of being in any degree accessary to your misfortunes. I have seldom in my life formed engagements that I have not per- formed—and never voluntarily forfeited one—In no instances what- ever within my memory have I pledged myself to you Gentlemen, either directly or indirectly—If Mr Barlow or any other man has made use of my name in the sale of lands to you it is your misfortune but not my fault—If Col. Duer has sent him to France to negociate such a Sale," the authorities should have been critically examined— it would appeared I believe that they were neither derived from me or Mr Cutler—the only authority vested in Col. Duer by us was the appointment of an agent under the instructions before mentioned and the proper attentions upon your part would have evinced this in france and the want of them has made you accessary in a degree to the con- sequences of the impositions you now experience—To relieve you how- ever as much as possible shall be my endeavour—Considering you as Citizens of this Territory it is my duty so to do—As foreigners you have an additional claim upon me—but none upon the principles you imply— Mr Cutler and myself are poor in fortune; if it was otherwise I should have no objections to your essay of the "means" proposed— Our friends I know will believe us at all times ready and willing to do good and to do justice to all men without the coercion of law—But whatever Gentlemen shall be your final determination I shall be happy, and I repeat it, to use my best endeavours for your service—you have only to point out the mode. I know but few of the attendant circumstances of your being brought into this Country or your consequent disappointments thereupon— Col° Duer has always been so absorbed in business that I could derive no information from him—when I was over the mountains however in the Winter of 1790 I learned so much as to be convinced that you must be distressed beyond his or any individual capacity to relieve and would therefore have prevailed upon him to come forward with an ingenuous representation to Congress which I then imagined and am now convinced must be your dernier resort—but from some European expectations he declined it—It was my intention to have urged this advice until I had succeeded or come forward myself with the business but my public duties suddenly called me to the Territory—tho' not before I had reason to believe your situation would have been laid 81 See translation of a bill of sale between Barlow, agent of the Scioto associates in America, and the newly organized Scioto Company in Paris, Nov. 3, 1789, ibid., pp. 54-57. The agreement organizing the European counterpart of the Scioto Company is printed ibid., pp. 48-54. See also Barlow to Benjamin Walker, Dec. 21, 1790, and May 3, 1791, ibid., pp. 71-81.
Page 420
420 TERRITORIAL PAPERS before Congress in that session. Col. Duers disposition to your set- tlement is I make no doubt generous and good but he at present is deprived of the power to serve you. With the conduct of Mr. Barlow I am told he is much displeased and indeed in some instances that he thinks it nefarious—for my own part I have always thought him a man of integrity—But let the management of those Gentlemen have been what it may, yet they have it not in their power to make amends—if one thousand guineas would establish you happy I believe it is not in their ability to command it. I should therefore advise a candid impartial statement of your situation to Congress—handle me as you please (for if I have done wrong I ask no favor) I will transmit it as early as possible and spare no exertion to obtain for you the completion of all your reason- able wishes—92 W Sargent Captain Rome Dr Petit & Gentlemen of Gallipolis. [Endorsed] Legis: 1" Sess: 3d Cong Communication respecting the People of Gallipolis. November 23d 1792 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [SF: 2 Cong., 2 sess.: ALS] Philadelphia December 5th 1792 Sir, Your Letter of the 21" September,93 enclosing a Copy of an Order of the Senate relative to the Salaries, Fees and Emoluments of Persons holding Offices under the United States, and the actual Expenses and Disbursements attending the Execution of their respec- tive Offices for one Year,94 came to hand a few days ago:—You desire from me an Account of the Offices I hold, as Governor of the western Territory and superintendant of Indian Affairs, embracing those Objects, and for the period therein mentioned to end the first day of October last past.—in Answer, Sir, I have to observe that, by the Resolve of Congress of the third of October 178795 the Office of Super- 9» See petition to Congress, Dec. 22, 1792, post, p. 422, and a petition to the Ohio Company, Dec. 17, 1795, wherein the French emigrants applied for a free grant of the land on which the town of Gallipolis was situated (Belote, ed., op. ext., pp. 89-92). The Ohio Company refused to grant this demand, whereupon the petition was altered to request the company to sell the land in quarters, which was agreed to (ibid., p. 92). "A search among the Hamilton Papers in the Library of Congress failed to reveal this letter; it is not among the St. Clair Papers, nor has it been printed. « Annals, 2 Cong., 1 sess., 138. M Journals Amer. Cong., IV, 785.
Page 421
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 421 intendant of Indian Affairs for the northern Department was united with that of Governor of the western Territory, and the Compensa- tion that had been attached to that Office was added to the Salary of the Governor, making in the whole two thousand Dollars.—that, since the establishment of the present Government, there has been no Appointment of a Superintendant—and that, hitherto there has been no Fees, nor Emolument of any kind beside the Salary. It is not possible for me to give you, at this time an Account of the Expenses that regularly attend the discharge of the Office annually— nor of the Disbursements I have actually made—the last have been heavy, and have absorbed nearly the whole of the Salary. But, as a part, at least, of those Disbursements are out of the usual Course, having been incurred in the discharge of Duties specially directed by Congress, they cannot be fairly stated as incident to the Office, and I expect a reimbursement. The regular Expenses of the Governor will, however, be considera- ble for some Years to come; for, the Settlements are so distant and unconnected with each other—the Communications between them so difficult—the Manners of the People so dissimilar, as well as their Languages different, that, it seems to me, to be able to accommodate Laws to their different Situations, it will be necessary necessary for the Governor of that Territory to visit all the Settlements once a Year at least, notwithstanding that the extremes of them are nearly a thou- sand Miles apart.—His Expenses on those Occasions cannot be esti- mated at less than five hundred Dollars, especially when it is consid- ered that, in the french Settlements bordering on the Wabash and Missisippi, Money is of less value than, perhaps, in any other part of the World:—That, together with a small Sum for Stationery, House Rent, and Postage of Letters will form the whole Disbursements for the Goverment properly, and should be considered as an annual Expense, altho, in present Circumstances, it may not be incurred. The Disbursements in that part which respects the Indians cannot be conjectured, as they depend upon Circumstances entirely unfore- seen—there is at present no regular Expense attending it, that I know of, except a Salary of sixty Pounds pr Annum to an Interpreter at Pittsburgh—He was appointed by me; but, whether he is continued or dissmissed, I am not informed. I have the honor to be Sir Your very humble Servant Ar Sl Clair The honorable Alexander Hamilton Secretary of the Treasury. [Endorsed] 2? Sess: L. 2d Con: Letter from governor Sl Clair, con- cerning his Emolument
Page 422
422 TERRITORIAL PAPERS PETITION OF THE FRENCH INHABITANTS OF GALLIPOLIS [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:DS] [December 22,1792] Petition des cy devant français habitants de GaUipolis à L'honorable Congrès des Etats Unis de L'Amerique Representé86 Que Les français habitants de Gallipolis ont acquis en france En L'année 1790 des Terres Sittuee dans Le territoire Nord-ouest des Etats Unis, d'une Compagnie ameriquaine formée Sous le Nom de la Compagnie du Scioto par un acte passé Entre les Associés de Cette Compagnie le [blank] Joel Barlow agent legalement autorisé pour la vente de ces terres Par les dits associés Repandit dans Paris et dans toute La france des Plans et des Prospectus dont les habitants susdits soumettent La Véracité à L'honorable Congrés. Les avantages qu'offroient ces prospectus les facilites qu'ils annoncoient pour faire dans Ces contrees Eloignees un Etablissement] Indépendant Déterminerent dans le moment de Crise ou Le trouvoit a lors la france, une acquisition trés Considerable et une Emigration de Mille ou Douze Cents Ames, Parmi les qu'elles ou Comptoit plusieurs Personnes distinguees par leur Naissance, leur Rang dans la société, et leur fortune, Le plus Grand nombre étoit formé d'hommes Industrieux de Presque toutes Les Classes de la société qui ayant perdu Par la Révolution française une Grande partie de Leur fortune en Rassemblerent les débris pour Venie Jouir dans un Pais Libre et tranquille de tous les avantages annoncés d'une maniere si pompeuse et Si publique par la Compagnie du scioto y défricher a l'abri de Tout Danger des Champs fertiles ou y Cultiver les arts paisibles aux quels ils Avoient Consacré Leur Vie. Les Acquereurs furent Confirmes dans leurs projèts et Rassurés sur leurs Craintes par toutes les appa- rances légales qu'on leur presenta et par tous Les moyens de seduction qu'on mit en Oeuvre pour appuyer la solidité des titres Sur les quels ils achettoient et la preuve la plus frapante qu'on puisse en apporter, Est le nombre Considérable d'acquisitions faites par des hommes detoutes les professions, avec une Confiance et une bonne foi peu Communes dans des affaires de cette Espece. Il faut en convenir, ce qui mit le comble a la seduction, fut le Caractere Connu de la nation a La quelle appartenoient les personnes avec les quelles on traitoit, et la haute opinion qu 'on a En france a tant de titres de la bonnefoy et de la Loyanté Americaine et de la facilité que trouveroient des francais à obtenir Justice du Gouvernement des Etats Unis, contre La fraude et la deception. M See Sargent to the inhabitants of Gallipolis, Nov. 23, 1792, ante, p. 417, and J. Rome to the President, Mar. 6, 1793, post, p. 442.
Page 423
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 423 L'Emigration qui Commença au mois de fevrier 1790 dura Jusqu'a la fin du mois d'aout de la même année trois des quatre Premiers Batiments qui arriverent en Amerique Chargés d'Emigrants francais se Reunirent à Aléxandrie vers le Commencements du mois de may, peu de tems aprés leur arriveé ils furent visités par des agents de Wme Duer Sur Intendant de la Compagnie du scioto ces agents Etoient autoriseés à traites avec Eux au nom de cette Compagnie et à Leur procurer les moyens de se Rendre au Lieu de leur destination. Le Resultat de Cette Négotiation fut un acte passé Entre Wme Duer au nom de sa Compagnie et les Emigrants francais sous le titre de Conventions. On prend Soin par un article particuliere de ces Con- ventions de Rassurer les Emigrants Sur les Craintes fondées qu'on leur avoit inspirées à leur arrivée des Excurtions des Sauvages dans la Contrée qu'ils alloient occuper. Contrée dont on avoit pris tant desoin de Leur Vanter en france la tranquilité et la paix. Les Emigrants partirent d'Alexandrie vers la fin du mois de Juin et furent arretés à Winchester Sous divers pretestes Jusqu'au mois de septembre Suivant. Ils furent Joints dans cette ville Par des Passa- yers de divers Batiments, et ils arriverent enfin à Gallipolis a la fin du mois d'octobre de la même annee87 Depuis leur arrivée ils sonts reduits a Cultiver autour de l'Enceinte de cette Ville le Peu de terrein qu'on n'a pas pu Refuser à leurs impor- tunites sur un fond qui dit on appartient à une autre Compagnie et dont on les menace aujourd'huy de les déposeder. De Mille ou douze Cents personnes qui Sont passées en amerique Seduites par les offres avantageuses de la Compagnie du scioto quatre Cents Seulement se Sont rendues à Gallipolis, et ce nombre se trouve aujourd'huy reduit à deux Cents Cinquante qui par la Confiance qu'ils ont mise en la Compagnie du scioto et en La justice des Etats Unis ont. En La Constance de lutter Contré les obstacles detour Les Genres, et de braver les Perils d'une Guerre affreuse.—Les pertes Enormes et Irreparables qu'ils ont. Essayées par cette Guerre, la perte plus, Irreparable Encore de trois années de leur tems, L'impossi- bilité dans laquelle ils ont été d'Employer les ouvriers qu'ils avoient aménés à Grands fraix de france, et les Indemnities qu'ils ont été obliges de leur accorder, faute de pouvoir Remplir les Engagements qu'ils avoient Contractés, ont Epuisé presque toutes leurs Ressources et tous le fruit de leur dépense, consiste en quelques défrichements apeine Suffisants pour les faire Vivre Quel parti peu tent prendre des Etrangers Ignorants des lois des formes et même du langage de la nouvelle patrie qu'ils ont adopteé, et qui ont a Lutter avec tant de désavantages contre un Corps nom- w Letters of Putnam to M. Guion, Mar. 9, 1790, and to William Duer, May 1, 28, and 30, 1790; and letters of Guion to Duer, May 31 and June 2, 1790, de- scribing this emigration, are printed in Belote (ed.), "Selections from the Gallipo- lis Papers", Quar. Pub. Hist, and Phil. Soc. Ohio, II, 82-89.
Page 424
424 TERRITORIAL PAPERS breux et puissant, que d'avoir Recours aux pouvoir souverain de se mettee Sous Sa protection et de Reclamer Sa Justice. Le souverain ne souffrain pas qu'on abuse Sous Ses yeux de la Crédulité d'un peuple trop facile qu'on L'arrache des Champs qu'il à Cultives, des habita- tions qu'ils s'est Construites, il demande avec Confiance que le sou- verain pouvoir lui fasse Assurer la possession des Défrichements qu'il à arrasés de ses sueurs et de son sang—qu'il lui fasse—délivrer une Quantité de terres qui Balance Ses acquisitions—il Laisse à sa Gene- rosité à Déterminer Sur Les Indemnités qu'ils Croyent meriter par leur fidélité, leur rêle et les pertes que la Guerre Leur a fait Eprouver Gallipolis Le 22 Decembre 1792 [Endorsed] Legis: 2s Sess: 2d Cong: Petition of the French inhab- itants of Gallipolis praying the interposition of Government in con- firming the titles to certain Lands purchased of William Duer Agent for the Sciota company. December 22? 179298 Le Chev De Rome Serre quiff Dazet Magniev pour grandjean Desnoyers Lemme Verts Autran Pierre Richon Charpentier AWillard D F Villiren Ginat Chemin quetel98a et son frere Maquet perre et fils a vincent Prieux Fe Mennemerlee P. ferard Eloy Fiece C. Leduc Garard98m Magniev Bauinier Chandivert pere Du Port Bastille Meutely Dubois Duteis lenée Matry vonschriltz courset Marure Visinier Cadot Magnen Pierre Chabo Bithery J. g. T Petit Millet Mike Dupin M. P. Leduc Bureau Drouilly Rouby davous petit jean A. B. Duc Auger Enquaine J. [?]. Droze 89 See report of House committee on this petition, Feb. 14, 1793, post, p. 435. See also report of the Attorney General to the Senate, Mar. 24, 1794, relative to the claims of the French settlers to lands under purchases from the Scioto Company, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 29-30, and the act of Mar. 3, 1795, 1 Stat. 442-443. Practically illegible.
Page 425
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 425 J Gervais Petit Thaub98' Laforge pour moi Laforge Conu98* fondé de pouvoirs de Mr8 Laperouze Baudot et de Mr Demir981 le duc Bertrand S. LeClerce Lambert albert Journay f daveri Minquet Minque fils Serrot Rivier Louis vanden Benden Martinus vanden Benden Valton tillaye Prioux ici Labille Joitteau Bailly Mandeville Cherean W. De Vacht X98» Guerin S: Leclerc ame C. Marret X Signature hebert Le Moyne de Ville Pierre Le Clerc Maldan Berthelot Pubert Laroire Guerier Chanterlle Berthelot af Saugrain Laurent Sarazin X signature de Mr Diort Prizon viollotte M W Duteil jeune Monnot Coupin Buzenet M pradel Perot petit jean Picard X signature de H marion D'hebecourt f. bruynier Catteron Gidou Bronis Sirson duclos Chemin Thomas hurtause p. marret H thevenin P. P°n Mr l'hudlier98* August [MS. torn] a jourd'hui sont comp [MS. torn] la cour Des pleas pour le winte de [MS. torn] etats unis Les personnes Suffig [MS. torn] nombre de neuf; Lequelles ou [MS. torn] L express De lews vous et ont signe' maniere En Ma presence En foi depuis j'ai Donné Le present a certificat a 23 Decembre 1792 J Petit judge of C. C. C pleas [Endorsed] L. 1" Sess: 3d Con. petition of the French inhabitants of Galliopolis. 9th February, 1793. referred to Mr Wadsworth, Mr Sedgwick, Mr Findley, Mr White, & Mr Barn[well] 14th Februa[ry] [MS. torn] reported on [MS. torn] 20th Feb[ruary] [MS. torn] report agreed [MS. torn] by the same [MS. torn] Wadswh Sedgwick findley White Barnwell 98» Practically illegible.
Page 426
426 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [A contemporary official translation] [December 22, 1792] The Petition of the French Inhabitants of Gallipolis to the Honorable Congress of the United States of America sheweth: That the French Inhabitants of Gallipolis—Did purchase in France in the Year One Thousand seven hundred and Ninety Lands situated in the Territory of the United States North West of the Ohio River from an American Company formed under the Name of the Company of Scioto by an Act passed between the Partners of the said Company on the 29th of october in the Year of Our Lord One thousand seven hundred and eighty Seven Joel Barlow, Agent of the Company lawfully authorized by the Concerned for the Sale of those Lands distributed in Paris and through the other Parts of France vast Numbers of Maps, pamphlets and Handbills, the Veracity of which is submitted by the aforesaid Inhab- itants to the Honorable Congress The Advantages offered by their Proposals, the Facility which they held out of easily mak1ng an independent Settlement in those remote Countries (in the critical Situation of France at that Time) procured very considerable Purchases of those Lands to be made and occasioned an Emigration of a thousand or Twelve hundred Individuals, among whom were several persons distinguished by their Birth, their Rank and their fortune. The greatest Number consisted of industrious Men from almost every Class of the Society, who, after having lost a considerable Portion of their Fortune collected the Fragments thereof in Order to go and enjoy in a free and quiet Country all the Advantages so publickly so pompously announced by the Scioto Company and far from the Scene of Danger they longed to be improv- ing that fertile Soil or to cultivate there the peaceful Arts to which they had devoted their Lives. The Purchasers were confirmed in their Expectation and secured against their Apprehensions by all the apparently legal Documents shewn to them together with the Means of Seduction that were employed in Addition to the Solidity of the Titles, upon which they became Purchasers. The most striking Proof of this Assertion is the considerable Number of Purchases made by Men, of every Professions with a Degree of Confidence and Goodfaith very uncommon in Business of this Nature—. It must be owned, that, what compleated the Seduction was the well known Character of the Nation to which belonged the Individuals, with whom they contracted and the high Opinion, which generally and So justly prevails in France with Respect to the Goodfaith and Candour of the Americains and also the Expectation and Belief that Frenchmen would easily obtain Justice and Redress from the Government of the United States against fraud and Deception.
Page 427
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 427 The Emigration, which began in the Month of February in the Year One thousand seven hundred and Ninety lasted untill the latter End of the Month of August in the same year; Three of the first four ships, which arrived to America met together at Alexandria about the Beginning of May; soon after their Arrival, they were visited by some Agents of Wm Duer, Superintendant of the Scioto Company Those Agents were authorized to treat with them in the Name of the said Company, and to procure them' the Means of reaching the place of their Destination The Result of that Negociation was a Contract executed between Wm Duer in the Name of his Company, and the French Inhabitants. By one of the Articles of which said Contract great Care was taken to remove the well grounded fears, which had been inspired to the Emigrants on their Arrival with Respect to the Incursions of the Indians into the Country where they were going to settle, although the pretended Peace and Tranquillity of the said Country had been so highly extolled to them when in France. The Emigrants left Alexandria towards the End of the Month of June, but were detained in Winchester under sundry Pretences untill the Month of September following. They were met at that Place by Passengers from several ships, and at last arrived at Gallipolis about the End of the Month of October of the same year. Since their Arrival there they have been reduced to cultivate round the Limits of that Town some small Portions of ground, which could not be refused to their Importunities, altho' it is that the said same Ground is the Property of another Company, which now threatens to dispossess Your Petitioners. Out of a thousand or twelve hundred persons, who seduced by the advantageous Offers of the Scioto Company emigrated into America, Four hundred only arrived at Gallipolis, and yet that Number is now reduced to Two hundred and fifty Individuals, who from their Confi- dence in the Scioto Company and especially in the Equity of the United States have struggled against Obstacles of every kind and braved the incessant Dangers of Savage War. The enormous and irreparable Losses, which they have suffered by that War, the still more irreparable Loss of three years of their time, the Impossibility they have experienced of employing the Workmen, whom they had brought from France at a great Expence and the In- demnities, they have been obliged to allow them not being able to fulfill their former Engagements with them, have almost entirely ex- hausted all their Resources so, that they have obtained nothing from their considerable Expences but the clearing of few Spots of ground, which are hardly sufficient to afford them a bare Subsistance. What other Resolution can be adopted by strangers entirely ignorant of the Laws, formalities and even the Language of the new Country, which they have made their own, who are forced to struggle with so
Page 428
428 TERRITORIAL PAPERS many Disadvantages against a numerous and powerful Body, but that of applying to the Sovereign Power and implore its equitable Interfer- ence and Patronage. The Government will not suffer an Advantage to be taken before their own Eyes of the Credulity of an unsuspecting people. Congress will not suffer them to be dragged from the fields which they have cultivated and from the Dwellings which they have so painfully raised They therefore humbly request, That they may be maintained and secured in the'Possession of the Lands, which they have cleared with the Sweat of their Brows and often watered with their Blood; That the Government will be pleased, to grant them Lands adequate to their original Purchase, They leave to its Gener- osity to determine and Decide upon the Indemnities to which they hope, they will be thought intitled by their Fidelity and Zeal and by the Losses which they have Suffered on Account of the War. Gallipolis the 22d of Dec*" 1792. J. Rome L. Vanden Benden In the name of the french inhabitants of Gallipolis SENATOR BENJAMIN HAWKINS TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters:ALS] Senate Chamber 11th of Jany 1793 I send you herewith the papers mentioned this morning. Mr Mor- ris acknowledging himself in the Senate, a party concerned,/and as such, would not vote/moved to postpone the consideration of the last memorial, assigning as the reason, "that the Indians in question, would soon be in this city, that the company meant to apply to them, on the subject, and had reason to believe, that they would not hesitate to acknowledge the validity of their claim."99 I have the honor to be, with the sincerest attachment sir, your obedient servant Benjamin Hawkins The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Col° Hawkins with a Copy of the Petition of the Illonois & Wabash Companies to the Senate & the Report of a Com- mittee thereupon—Jany 11th 1793 n See petition of Illinois-Wabash Land companies, Dec. 12,1791, ante, p. 353.
Page 429
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 429 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers: ALS] Cincinnati January 20th 1793 My Dear Sir In the accompanying Letter 1 I have not been as particular and express when the Conduct of Judge Symmes and the rest of their honours or many of them as perhaps I ought—The want of their proper Exertion has at all Times rendered the Duties of the Governor [Ms. illegible] arduous—one Instance in point not already quoted may be seen in my Letters to Symmes and the County Courts here in the Communications of June &c* of last year2—a very criminal Inattention of Symmes' in a Case of Occupation and where the Usurper was the Dam'st rascal in the world except [blank] involved me in Embarrasments from which with much Trouble however I extricated myself—This was a Sin of Omission of his honour and if he was guilty only in this Way (in a private View of things) he might be forgiven—In the Disturbances here however he has taken an active part to Sedition—popularity is his Aim, but he seems to have stag- gered like a drunken man. "Nil niger est"—his Conduct in the affair of that Letter to Gen1 W3—the Circumstances of which you are acquainted with must so stamp him in your Excellency's opinion. Alone, without support the Task of the Governor in this County will be arduous—Licentious however as are most of the people the Influence of the magistrates in as good Examples and the proper Discharge of their respective Duties would be I am persuaded effectual— The printed Copies of our Laws have arrived and are in Train as you will observe by the Enclosed advertisements *— Some reluctance and uneasiness having arisen by enrolling indis- criminately all Ranks of people in the Town together in the militia I have consented to a separate Company for reasons which I hope will appear proper to your Excellency5—the enclosed papers B C will throw some Light upon the Subject—the Conveyance is just passing me & I must close 1 am my Dear Sir Ever affectionate W Sargent [Endorsed] W. Sargent Jany 20—1793 1 Jan. 19, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 399. 2 Sargent to Symmes, June 4 and 13, 1792, ibid., pp. 377, 379, and Symmes's reply, June 30, ante, p. 402. * See Sargent to Wilkinson, June 4, 1792, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 376. « Jan. 16, 1793, ibid., p. 397. 5 See petition of Jan. 14, 1793, Sargent Papers (MHS), and entries in Journal Exec. Procs., Jan. 18 and 30, and Feb. 1, 1793, post, ill, 398, 404, 405.
Page 430
430 TERRITORIAL PAPERS TOBIAS LEAR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD: Misc. Letters:LPC] January 30th 1793. By the President's command T. Lear has the honor to transmit to the Secretary of State two petitions from Sundry Inhabitants of Post Vincennes, which the President requests the Secretary will take into consideration and report to him his opinion of what ought to be done respecting them. [Endorsed] The Secy of State 30th Jany 1793 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, n:ALS] Philadelphia February 2d 1793 Sir, I beg that you will be pleased to dispense with my Attend- ance with the Indians this morning. The Committee on the failure of the last Expedition have determined to report again on Tuesday or Wednesday next, and I have only a day or two to examine, and reply to, the length [y] communications from General Knox and the late Quarter Master, which they have taken more than three Months to prepare and in which the Causes of that failure are represented, if not directly, at least by direct Inference as proceeding from me, and I can- not have access to them but in Congress Hours. My want of punctuality Yesterday requires an Apology—I was not apprised that the Indians were to be with [you] until a few Minutes before the Hour, and I was then engaged with the Committee, when the Clerk of the War office called, and delivered a Message in your Name— I have the honor to be Sir Your most obedient Servant Ar Sl Clair. The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Govr Sl Clair 2 Feby 1793 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] Cincinnati February the 6th 1793 My Dear Sir This Letter I expect will be conveyed over the mountains by Judge Symmes who it seems is determined to leave the Territory notwithstanding the approaching Terms for the two western Counties and that no one can probably be there to heed the Courts but himself—I have remonstrated in a Letter to him6 which if it has not • Feb. 6, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, m, 406.
Page 431
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 431 the Effect to delay his Journey I still conceive it my Duty to transmit to the Secretary of State with the Information that their honours shall have all made the Exit or Exeunt—the amenda I should hope of Course—Judge Putnam probably is taken away by national Concern, but Judge Turner and Judge Symmes can have no Avocations away that I know of otherwise than private—Their absence must increase and multiply my attentions to objects of public notice almost every Day arising from some one part of the Territory or other, and the Duties of my Offices are already too much accumulated by your Excellency's necessary long absence. Private Business can not justify their being away I am persuaded— I have tried the effect of this in vain for myself and have I believe sacrificed all the property I had in the World because I could not obtain a short Leave of Absence and dared not to take it— I trust that you will be in Philadelphia upon the Judges Arrival and during his Continuance there—he bears not to you more than myself I believe any good will notwithstanding he may sometimes put on a fair outside—And against some men there is scarcely the possibility of being armed—the man of Cunning who will not come forward but by Insinuation and inuendo is a dangerous Foe—Conscious as I am that I have ever discharged my Duties in Fidelity I could dread no Search or research directed by public Authority and effected in a fair handed Style—but [not] of a man who could receive a letter from one person, The Seal unbroken—search into the Contents & eface the same and hand it over to the Character for whom it had been intended in that order, and insinuate that the violations thereupon had been made by a man who never had any Knowledge of the same, or even that there was such a Letter in Existence requesting at the same time that his name might not be called in question "Nil niger est—hunc tu—Caveto"— I believe you have already been informed that this Business pro- duced two cavalier Letters from Gen1 W. & myself—that serious Consequences might have ensued but for the Gen1's Discovery of this mans Iniquity which was communicated to Us with an Injunction of Secrecy 7— I hope my Dear Sir you will do me the Favour to write me soon and give me Information when I may expect you in the Territory certain With every Sentiment of Respect and Esteem I have the honour to be your most obedient Humble Servant Winthrop Sargent His Excellency Governor St Clair [Endorsed] February 6th 1793 Private8 7 See Sargent to St. Clair, Feb. 12, 1793, post, p. 433. 8 Answered May 15, 1793, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 432
432 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers: ALS] Eve of February the 7th 1793 Cincinnati Dear Sir Since writing the accompanying Letters a matter has turned up which possibly may be misrepresented and I wish it to stand properly in Your mind from private of even as public Consider- ations; Upon application of Judge Symmes some Time past I agreed to increase the Judges of the pleas to Five,9 from his nomination in one Instance and my best Judgment in the other—a Commission was made out accordingly and issued the Day before yesterday "during pleasure'' which words have been exceptionable the new appointed Judges declining to act thereupon, and the new and old writing in the Lan- guage of 1774, 75 of Liberty Privilege &ca &ca &ca.10 So the matter stands and I shall suffer the old Court to go on except public Instances of their corruption should be adduced to me in which Case at all Events I should cry them down by proclamation—how far their pro- ceedings under the old Commission may be vicious however may perhaps be a Subject of Inquiry at a future day, I shall take Care myself to say nor do nothing to prevent or Embarrass the operation of the apparent Courts of Justice—I beg Leave just to remark that the Commissions of the Courts of Justice in the Different Counties are I believe Expressly during pleasure and indeed on other Commis- sions—in Washington and Knox Counties I know it to be the Case— I have not Time to refer to the Records for Satisfaction as to this and St Clair Counties—but I will recollect that you have observed to me you should upon due Cause supersede any officer—And if this power be not with the Governor where shall it rest—the general Court Sit only annually—the Judges thereof are almost always absent— on the morrow there will not be one in the Territory And more Cor- ruption I candidly declare I believe does not exist in the world amongst an equal number of people than in the Body of hamilton County as is exhibited by their general Conduct and particularly in their Conduct as grand and petit Juries as I can evince I think to you Sir—I should adduce to you some Cases in point but have not time—I must add however that I believe your Excellency's Commission is during pleas- ure 11—mine I know may be revoked at any Time by the President, but the Sentiments of those people are I suspect derived from his honour our Friend who I religiously believe would delight to throw every Obstacle and Impediment to embarrass You or me—He comes • Feb. 5, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 405. 10 Feb. 5, 1793, Sargent Papers (MHS); Sargent's reply, Feb. 9, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 408. 11 Appointed for three years, subject to the pleasure of the President, Sept. 4. 1789 (Commissions, LC).
Page 433
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 433 on now probably with some view to Government such however seems the opinion of his Friends— With every Sentiment of Respect I am your affectionate Humble Servant _. _ W Sargent [Endorsed] February 7th 1793 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] Cincinnati February 12th 1793 Dear Sir I have necessarily been induced to write you very much of late relative to this governt and must proceed—many of my letters however have gone on by that honourable Gentleman Judge Symmes and may be mislaid or otherwise disposed of—for I can suspect him of any meaness, but I have covered the Letters to General Knox— enclosed was one full of Solicitation and remonstrance to prevent him Leaving the Territory at this Time when he should be preparing to hold the Court in the western Counties and another to the Secretary complaining that they were ineffectual and representing our Territory as totally without their honours 12— I mentioned to you in a private Letter my having issued a new Com- mission for the Court of common pleas in this County during pleasure;13 This I have reason to think Symmes is Surcharged as a matter of Complaint—the enclosed Letter will tend to explain the Business if Explanation be necessary—You will have no Doubt I am persuaded that I have and always do act from Honour and Conscience and will be capable by being on the Spot of making proper representations— I have not looked over the records to observe whether your Commis- sions to the Court were during pleasure but knowing that you would when you thought proper supersede any Appointments and knowing also in this Country it might be necessary so to do I did not hesitate a moment as to the Style—For if the power to displace rests not with the Governors Officers in the worst Events may be so permanent as to produce great public Taxing—The general Court is but annual any where and not known at all in the two western Counties—No Crime against the public or even the most flagitious Conduct of a popular magistrate could be adduced to Conviction and Sentence I am per- suaded in the County of Hamilton—that great invaluable blessing of Trial by Juries I shall convince your Excellency personally as I think it my Duty to do when you shall come on is perverted to a Curse in Hamilton County and I can I think demonstrate to any honest im- partial man that the Solemn Ties of sacred Oaths and Obligation they might range uncontrouled—Licentiousness is their Characteristic and 12 Sargent to Symmes, Feb. 6, 1793, and to the Secretary of State, Feb. 7, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 406, 407. 1» Feb. 7, 1793, supra. 126660—34 29
Page 434
434 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the magistrate who shall dare to enforce the Laws which are adopted will of Course become the Object of their highest Displeasure—under this which seems a pretty general Impression here you cannot expect the due Exertion—Notwithstanding the violent outrages which have been committed and which have in part been detailed to you the Court have been comparitively Silent—a Deposition declares very great Dis- orders at a house particularly pointed out was laid before them refered to the grand Jury and there it rested to the great Encouragement of similar Conduct—If the Justices, as they have a legal Right to do, had themselves examined Evidences they would have found sufficient matter to have demanded security for the peace and good Behavior of a number of suspected Characters and future good Consequences would have accrued—but candidly I believe they will at all Events go with the multitude even to do Evil—I wish to show tham all pos- sible respect and have endeavoured to do it—I have endeavoured to consider them—the magistrates in all Instances as the best and first men in the different Counties—And a public circular Letter upon the Journal demonstrates this—Old Symmes has also received from me more Attention and Deference than his Conduct either to You or me in the public Line merited—in private Consideration he has and will evermore I dare say conduct himself like a rascal— The Court of common pleas in this County have the most positive proof in themselves that I can not ever remove men from Office from personal Considerations for they have suffered me to be most grossly insulted before them without the notice and attention which was indeed due to their own Dignity as a court—To your appointments I have always been induced also to very great consideration from delicate and I trust proper principles—If Mcmillan had been of my own appointment I would have removed him within the Garrison Boundaries & [he would have] voluntarily subjected himself to mar- tial Law as a follower of the Army—I had some conversation with him as to the Compatability of his remaining a magistrate under such Disabilities but told him I should not displace him from the Considera- tions before mentioned—this was a long while past and before he had changed his Abode—You will not I know deem me wrong in this much writing you when you take into consideration my motives— I am my Dear Sir affectionately and with very great Respect Your humble Servant Winthrop Sargent P. S. If old Symmes gets a private Interview with the President he will attempt to stab me in the Dark—unless your Excellency can guard me—I trust 'tis in your power—I say trust as Turner writes old Symmes—so Symmes says "Governor Sl Clair is out of Joint with the president" Governor Sl Clair
Page 435
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 435 THE PRESIDENT TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [SD:Misc. Letters: D] United States Feby12th 1793— Sir, The Hostile Indians having requested that all the Treaties which have been entered into with the several Western & Northern Tribes, may be produced at the proposed meeting at Sandusky14— Therefore in order, that the Commissioners, for the proposed treaty, should be fully informed on the subject of their mission, it would be proper, that a summary view, should be formed of all the Treaties which have been made with the aforesaid Indians, from the treaty of Fort Stanwix in 1768 to the present time inclusively—and any well- grounded exceptions to the validity of any treaty to be noticed— The parties on both sides which made the several treaties—and in cases of the relinquishment of lands, the consideration given should be specified— And perhaps, to have a more comprehensive view of the subject, it would be necessary to extend the inquiry prior to the time above mentioned, so as to comprehend any treaties with the French, rela- tively to the cession of lands by the Indians north-west of the Ohio— In the inquiry, it will be necessary to note as far as the information shall be attainable, the acknowledged proprietors of the lands relinquished to the whites, as may have been conceded generally by other Indians bordering on the tribes who may have relinquished the said lands— I request that you will undertake this subject, and lay the result before me at as early a period as conveniently may be— (signed) G W The Attorney General of the United States— [Endorsed] To The Att» Gen1 of the U. S. 12th Feby 1793— REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON THE GALLIPOLIS PETITION [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:AD] [February 14, 1793] The Committee on the Petition of the French inhabitants of Galliopolis16—Report That there are in Number of those inhabitants Two Hundred & fifty—that One Hundred & fifty bear Arms that they have set down on Land which they supposed they had a good title too; by purchase. and have cultivated them with great industry—that they have been greatly disappointed in their just expectations of haveing a good "See circular of the President to the heads of Departments, Mar. 22, 1793, post, p. 447. « Dec. 22, 1792, ante, p. 422.
Page 436
436 TERRITORIAL PAPERS title to their Lands which are now claimed by the Ohio Company— and actually within their grant to that Company the Petitioners are an industrous good people & form a respectable frontier they have done Millitary duty all the last winter without pay—and as the Indians are more easily conciliated by French people (& less apt to make war on them) than any others—Your Committee are of opinion it would be a great injury to the United States to have the Petitioners go away ruined and disgusted to the Spanesh settlements to which they are invited. Your committee are of Opinion that it would be good Policy to grant To the Petioners Thirty Thousand acres of Land to be divided among them in quarters proportioned to their sale purchas and Twenty thousand acres to be divid[ed] equally among all the Petitioners acctual settlers [Endorsed] 1Bt Sess: 3d Con. Report (Mr Wadsworth) on the peti- tions of the French Inhabitants of Gallipolis. 14th February, 1793, Ordered to lie on the table. 20th February, Agreed to, and Bill ordd 16 by Mr Wadsworth, Mr Sedgwick, Mr Findley, Mr White, & Mr Barnwell. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers: LS] War Department, 16th February, 1793. Sir/ I have the honor respectfully to submit to your consideration, certain general ideas, which may be proper for the heads of the Instruc- tions to the Commissioners for treating with the hostile Indians17— After you shall have decided upon the general principles of the Instruc- tions, the details may be formed and submitted to your judgment— With the highest Respect I have the honor to be Sir/. Your most Obedt hume servt H Knox The President of the United States 19 Passed by the House of Representatives, Feb. 27, 1793 (Annals, 2 Cong., 2 sess., 895), and rejected by the Senate, Mar. 2,1793 (ibid., p. 664). The Senate voted on the same day to refer the Gallipolis petition of Dec. 22, 1792, to the Attorney General to report to the next session upon the validity of the claims to lands {ibid., p. 665). The report of the Attorney General, Mar. 22, 1794 (A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 29-30), reviewed the respective rights and responsibilities of the various parties concerned (the Ohio Company, the Scioto Company and the settlers) and reached the conclusion that legislative action rather than judicial proceedings would be necessary for the relief of the settlers. In this connection, see also Hulbert (ed.), Recs. Ohio Co., II, 231-232. The original House bill, Feb. 27, 1793, is in the Senate files, 2 Cong., 2 sess., and the bill as finally passed entitled, "An Act to authorize a grant of Lands to the French inhabitants of Gallipolis", approved Mar. 3, 1795, is in 1 Stat. 442-443. 17 See heads of the Departments to the President, Feb. 25,1793, post, p. 440; instructions to the commissioners, Apr. 26, 1793, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 340-342.
Page 437
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 437 THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [LC: Jefferson Papers :LS] (Private.) United States, February 17th 1793. Sir. I transmit you a Copy of a letter from the Secretary of War to me, with the heads of Instructions proposed to be given to the Commissioners who may be appointed to hold a Treaty with the Western Indians, in the spring.— - As I intend, in a few days, to call for the advice and opinion of the Heads of the Departments on the points touched upon in the enclosed paper, I must request you will give it an attentive and serious con- sideration, and note such alterations, amendments or additions, in writing, as may appear to you proper to be introduced into the in- structions proposed to be given to the Commissioners.— I shall likewise request the opinion of the same Gentlemen upon the expediency of asking the advice of the Senate, before the end of their present Session, as to the propriety of instructing the Commissioners to recede from the present boundary, provided peace cannot be estab- lished with the Indians upon other terms.—I therefore desire you will turn your attention to this matter also, in order that you may be able to give a deliberate opinion thereon, when the Gentlemen shall be called together.18— G° Washington The Secretary of State — [Endorsed] [MS. torn] recd Feb. 17. MEMORIAL FROM GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO CONGRESS [SF:2 Cong., 2 sess.:ALS] [February 18, 1793] To the Senate and the House of Representatives of the united States the Memorial of Arthur St Clair Governor of the Territory of the united States north west of the Ohio respectfully representeth That your Memorialist, in the execution of certain Duties, and the performance of sundry Services prescribed to him by Congress, made Disbursements, and contracted Debts, which considerably exceeded the Funds placed in his Hands. That his Accounts were presented to the late Board of Treasury in due time, but were not passed, because it did not appear that all the Items charged had actually been paid.—and it was indeed the case, that they had not been all paid—the Articles had been obtained upon his private Credit, and, of course, the Accounts were without receipts upon them for payment. 19 See the reply of the heads of the Departments, Feb. 25, 1793, post, p. 440.
Page 438
438 TERRITORIAL PAPERS That, after the establishment of the present Government, your Memorialist did present his Accounts for Settlement at the Treasury, where the same Objection was taken, and he was, in order to obtain receipts so as to form Vouchers conformably to the Rules there adopted, obliged to give Bonds to the Individuals. That a farther Objection has been made, to wit, that several of the Charges, tho' unexceptionable in themselves, and necessarily incident to the Duties your Memorialist had to perform, are not authorized by any existing Law, which still prevents a Settlement, to the great Injury of the Creditors, and to himself; for he is thereby exposed to the danger of Suits at Law for Debts contracted for the public, and he has reason to believe that such Suits will soon be instituted against him. Your Memorialist therefore prays that the Officers of the Treasury may be empowered equitably to adjust his Accounts and pay what- ever Ballance may be found to be due to him.19 Ar Sl Clair [Endorsed] Legis: 2d Sess: 2d Cong: Memorial of Arthur St Clair stating the performance of sundry services prescribed him by Congress he contracted debts which exceed the sums placed in his hands and praying that the officers of the Treasury may be empowered equitably to adjust his accounts. February 18th 1793 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO BEVERLEY RANDOLPH [LC: Jefferson Papers :LPC] Philadelphia Feb. 18.1793. Dear Sir A great assembly of the Northern & Western Indians is to be held at Sandusky in the approaching spring, to be met by three Commissioners from the general government to treat of peace. it is highly important that some person from the Southward, possess- ing the public confidence, should be in the commission: and a person too who has firmness enough to form opinions for himself. though I know that your health was sometimes in default, yet I have ventured to propose you to the President who joined at once in the wish that you would undertake it, and I expect he writes to you by this post, it will be the greatest collection of Indians (about 3000) which has ever taken place, and from very distant & various parts. the route thither will be through N. York, the Hudson, the Mohawk, L. Onta- rio, Niagara, and L. Erie, and you could return by Fort Pitt. the season the finest of the year, & I presume every accomodation will be provided which the nature of the service admits. I am not able to 19 See act to compensate Arthur St. Clair, May 31, 1794, 6 Stat. 16.
Page 439
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 439 say what the allowance will be, but I believe it has usually been 6. or 8. Doll, a day exclusive of expenses.20 but this is guess-work in me.— I hope you will resolve to undertake it, as I conceive the public interest intimately concerned in the conducting of this treaty, and on that con- sideration I am confident you will sacrifice any private disinclination to it. be pleased to present my best respects to m" Randolph & to be assured of the esteem with which I am Dear Sir, your friend & sert21 Th: Jefferson Beverley Randolph esq. SENATOR BENJAMIN HAWKINS TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Senate Chamber 20 feby 1793 There being a probality that an accommodation of our differences with the Northwestern Indians will be effected by treaty in the course of the expected negotiations with them: Or their enmity placed in so strong a point of view, as to endure a general acquiescance in the measures, which must of necessity be persued, by the government, to compell them to embrace such equitable terms, as the United States are willing to offer them. I cannot resist expressing to you an idea which forcibly opperates on my judgement as very desirable on the present occasion. It is well known that Mr Steel22 is one of the warmest and most decided opponents to many of the measures heretofore adopted, and if he should by the Executive be enabled to have any agency in the treaty I am of opinion it would have the effect contemplated. He will not be a member of the ensuing Congress. With perfect respect I have the honor to be sir, your obedient servant Benjamin Hawkins The President of the United States [Addressed] The President of the United States. [Endorsed] From Col° Hawkins 20th Feby 1793— 20 See message of the President to the House of Representatives, Feb. 19, 1793 (Richardson, ed., Messages and Papers, I, 136), and the act of Mar. 2, 1793, 1 Stat. 333. 21 Randolph's appointment was approved by the Senate Mar. 2, 1793 {Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 136). The appointment had previously, Jan. 23, 1793, been offered to Charles Carroll, as a representative of the southern states (Washington Papers, LC). 22 John Steele, Representative in Congress from North Carolina, 1789-1793, and Comptroller of the Currency, 1796-1802.
Page 440
440 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO P. BILLET [SD:Dom. Letters, v:C] Philadelphia, February 21" 1793. Mr. P. Billet. Sir, A petition signed by a number of persons at Post Vincennes,23 of whom you are first named, has been presented to the President of the United States, complaining 1" of duties imposed on all merchan- dize which raise them to exorbitant prices with you; and 2. That you are not permitted to sell or trade in any thing but on paying immense sums. The President has had this petition under considera- tion, and I am charged by him to observe that if by the duties complained of, you mean those imposed by the Spanish Government on supplies through the Missisippi, these are not subject to alteration by this Government. Relief from this, must depend on the result of negociations with Spain on behalf of our western Citizens for the free navigation of the Missisippi: but if by these duties is meant the impost paid on foreign importations on their entrance into our Atlantic ports, this depends on the Legislature of the United States, who would probably see great doubt and difficulty in taking off the imposts from those particular articles of importation which are sent forward to your settlement. As to the second complaint, it is supposed to have in view the regulations established by the Legislature for the Indian trade.24 Some regulations were found necessary; those established were the result of the best information which could be obtained but might still be revised by the Legislature if it can be shewn that hardship and injustice result from any particular part of them: But such proofs should be brought forward, and well articulated. In the mean time these regulations do not prohibit the disposal of any thing which is of the produce of your farms, the President will at all times feel peculiar happiness in contributing to relieve your settlement from any well founded grievances. After desiring you to communicate this to your fellow petitioners, I subscribe myself, Sir, Your most humble servant Th: Jefferson. THE HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers: DS «] [February 25, 1793] The President having required the attendance of the heads of the three departments and of the Attorney general at his house on Monday the 25th of Feb. 1793. the following questions were proposed and answers given. 2» Not found. "Act of June 22, 1790, 1 Stat. 137-138. u In the handwriting of Jefferson; a press copy is in the Jefferson Papers (LC).
Page 441
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 441 1. The Governor of Canada having refused to let us obtain provi- sions from that province or to pass them along the water communi- cation to the place of treaty with the Indians, and the Indians having refused to let them pass peaceably along what they call the bloody path, the Governor of Canada at the same time proposing to furnish the whole provisions necessary,26 Ought the treaty to proceed? Answer unanimously, it ought to proceed. 2. Have the Executive or the Executive & Senate together authority to relinquish to the Indians the right of soil of any part of the lands North of the Ohio, which has been validly obtained by former treaties? 27 The Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary at War & Attorney gen- eral are of opinion that the Executive & Senate have such authority, provided that no grants to individuals nor reservations to states be thereby infringed, the Secretary of state is of opinion they have no such authority to relinquish. 3. Will it be expedient to make any such relinquishment to the Indians if essential to peace? The Secretaries of the Treasury & War & the Attorney general are of opinion it will be expedient to make such relinquishment, if essen- tial to peace, provided it do not include any lands sold or reserved for special purposes (the reservations for trading places excepted) The Secretary of state is of opinion that the Executive and Senate have authority to stipulate with the Indians and that if essential to peace it will be expedient to stipulate that we will not settle any lands between those already sold or reserved for special purposes, and the lines here- tofore validly established with the Indians. Whether the Senate shall be previously consulted on this point? 4. The Opinion unanimously is that it will be better not to consult them previously.28 Th: Jefferson Alexander Hamilton H Knox Edm: Randolph. [Endorsed] Opinions of The Secretary of State The Secretary of the Treasury The Secretary of War & the Atty Gen1 of the U. S. respecting certain points relative to the Treaty proposed to be held with Indians N W. of the Ohio—and relative to furnishing 3,000,000 livres agreeably to the request of the French Ministry on acct of the Debt due to France 25 Feby 1793 * See General Hull to the Secretary of the Treasury, Feb. 6, 1793, Pickering Papers (MHS). "See the President to the Secretary of State, Feb. 17, 1793, ante, p. 437. »• See circular to the heads of departments, Mar. 22, 1793, post, p. 447.
Page 442
442 TERRITORIAL PAPERS TOBIAS LEAR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [LC: Jefferson Papers: ALS] February 26th 1793 By the President's command T. Lear has the honor to send to the Secretary of State a Copy of the proceedings of the Executive Depart- ment of the Government of the North Western Territory29—and a copy the laws passed there from the 1t day of July to the 31t of decem- ber 1792,30 which the President requests the Secretary to look over, and to report to him any thing that may therein apper to require the agency of the President, or that may be necessary to be known to him. The President wishes to know whether Judge Turner has gone to the Territory or not. And if he should not be gone, that he may be pressed to go immediately.— The President likewise wishes to know when Governor Sl Clair intends to go to his Government, as he conceives it highly proper that he should Repair thither without delay. Tobias Lear Secretary to the President of the United States. [Endorsed] Lear Tobias. recd Feb. 26. 1793. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters :AL] [March 2, 1793] The Secretary of State has examined the Journal of the Proceedings in the Executive department of government Northwest of the Ohio from July 1. 1792. to Dec. 31. 1792. referred to him by the President of the United States, and thereupon Reports That there is nothing contained in the said Journal which calls for any thing to be done on the part of the President of the United States. [Endorsed] From The Secretary of State 2d March 1793 J. ROME TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Philadelphia March 6th 1793 Sir Suffer me to address you in behalf of the french settlers at Gallipolis we preferred a petition to Congress, at their late Session, "July 3-Dec. 31, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ni, 411 et seq. ,° Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvn), 61-116.
Page 443
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 443 stating our embarrasments and distress from a supposed defect of title to the lands which we had purchased and paid for & have begun to cultivate, and praying the aid of Congress.31 the House of repre- sentatives pass'd a Bill granting us 50,000 acres of land: but this Bill failed in the Senate.32 The Senate, however, passed an order to the Attorney G*1,33 of which the inclosed is a copy—and several members of that Body inform me that it is their hope, that the Laws of the Country will be found competent to do us justice either in quieting us in the possession of the lands we claim, or by a compensation in damages from those of whom we purchased, and that considering our depressed state, they believe Congress would be willing to Support the expence of a legal investigation of our rights; and that they will themselves be responsible for any expence which may be incurre[d] for that end, before Congress shall m[eet] again. The order to the Attorney Gal has been presented to him, and he declared his readi- ness to render us every service in his power.34 We have further to hope Sir, as we are Strangers in the country, and almost ruined by the confidence we have placed in some of its citizens; and more especially, as delay of proceedings in our behalf, till the next session of Congress may prove fatal to the infant colony, that you will be pleased to regard our case, and as far as may consist with the powers vested in you, countenance and expedite a relief from our Sufferings. I have the honour to be Sir With the Greatest Respect Your most obedient Humble Servant Rome fourth Street. N° 5 The president of the United States [Endorsed] From M. Rome respecting the French Settlers at Galliopolis 6th March 1793—This letter was referred to the Atty Gen1 who took measures upon it— THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Misc. Letters :D] Sunday March 10th 1793 Sir, If upon a due consideration of the letter from the Secretary of the N. W. Territory to Govr St Clair, which you sent to me yester- day, and is herewith returned, you shall be of opinion that my official interference is necessary on the subject of that letter, I must request that you will report to me wherein such interference may be neces- »1 Dec. 22, 1792, ante, p. 422. "Annals, 2 Cong., 2 sess. (House), 868, 869, 875, 884, 889, 895; (Senate), 657, 658, 664. a Ibid., p. 665. M Opinion of the Attorney General, Mar. 22, 1794, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 29-30.
Page 444
444 TERRITORIAL PAPERS sary—as well as the Authority under which the President may exercise it.— But I confess to you that the long absence of the Governor as well as of some of the Judges from the territory,35 appears to me, if not the cause of producing the irregularities complained of by the Secretary, to be a great means of encouraging a spirit of riot & disorder, by relaxing the energy of the Laws.36—This therefore is an additional reason for me to wish that the Governor may be pressed to repair to the Territory without delay—and unless he does, I shall be under the disagreeable necessity of issuing a peremptory order for that purpose.— I wish to be informed whether Judge Turner has set out for the Territory.— I think it would be best for you to consult with the Attorney Gen1 to determine whether transcripts of the treaties made with the Indians under the State Governt of N. York should be sent for or not.— G W —N— The Secretary of State— [Endorsed] To The Secretary of State 10th March 1793 REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE RELATIVE TO INDIAN BOUNDARIES [LC: Jefferson Papers :LPC] [March 10, 1793] The Secretary of state, according to instructions received from the President of the U S., Reports That, for the information of the Commissioners appointed to treat with the Western Indians, he has examined the several treaties entered into with them subsequent to the declaration of Independence, & relating to the lands between the Ohio & lakes, & also the extent of the grants, reservations, & appropriations of the same lands, made either by the United States, or by individual states, within the same period, & finds that the lands obtained by the said treaties & not so granted, reserved, or appropriated, are bounded by the following lines, to wit, Northwardly. by a line running, from the fork of the Tuscarora's branch of the Muskingum, at the crossing place above Fort Lawrence, Westwardly (towards the portage of the Big Miami) to the main branch of that river, then down the Miami to the fork of that river next below the old fort which was taken by the French in 1752. thence due West to the river de la Panse, & down that river to the Wabash: 85 See Sargent to the Secretary of State, Feb. 7, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 407. See ibid., Jan. 2 and 19, 1793, pp. 390, 401.
Page 445
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 445 which lines were established with the Wiandots, Delawares, Chippa- was, & Ottawas by the treaty of fort M°Intosh, & with the Shawanese by that of the Great Miami. Westwardly, by the bounds of the Wabash Indians. Eastwardly. by the Million of acres appropriated to Military claimants by the resolution of Congress of Oct. 22. 1787.37 and lying in the angle between the VIIth range of townships counted West- wardly from the Pennsylvania boundary, and the Xth range counted from the Ohio Northwardly along the said VIIth which Million of acres may perhaps extend Westwardly so as to comprehend the XIIth range of townships, counted in that direction from the Penn- sylvania boundary: under which view the said XIIth range may be assumed for the Eastern boundary of the territory now under consideration, from the said Xth range to the Indian line. Southwardly. by the Northern boundary of the said Xth range of townships to the Sioto river, and along the said river to what shall be the Northern limit of the appropriations for the Virginia line: (which two last lines are those of the lands granted to the Sioto company): thence along what shall be the northern limits of the said appropriations of the Virginia line to the Little Miami, and along the same to what shall be the Northern limit of one million of acres of land purchased by John C. Symmes: thence due West along the said Northern limit of the sd John C. Symmes, to the Great Miami, & down the same to it's mouth: then along the Ohio to General Clarke's lands, & round the said lands to the Ohio again, & down the same to the Wabash or the lands of the Indians inhabiting it. Which several lines are delineated on the copy of Hutchins's map accom- panying this report; the dotted parts of the delineation denoting that they are conjectural. and it is further necessary to apprise the com- missioners that, tho' the points at which these several lines touch the Ohio are taken from actual surveys, yet the country included by the said lines, not being laid down from actual survey, their lengths & intersections with each other & with the watercourses, as appear- ing in the map, are not at all to relied on. No notice is here taken of the lands at the mouth of the Ohio appropriated for military bounties by the same resolution of Congress of Oct. 22. 1787. nor of the settlements of Cahokia, Kaskaskia, Post Vincennes &c.. because these can concern no Indians but those of the Illinois & Wabash, whose interests should be transacted with themselves separately, and not be permitted to be placed under the patronage of the Western Indians.38 Th: Jefferson Mar. 10, 1793. 37 Ante, p. 76. See the Secretary of State to the President, Mar. 13, 1793, post, p. 447.
Page 446
446 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: AL] [March 12, 1793] Th: Jefferson presents his respects to the President. according to the note of the 10th inst.39 he has enquired and finds that Judge Turner is not yet gone from this city. Mar. 12. 93. [Addressed] The President of the U S. [Endorsed] From The Secy of State March 12th 1793 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :LS] War department March 12th 1793 Sir The request made by the Indians of having some of "the friends" called Quakers to attend the treaty at Sandusky seems to deserve consideration.40 I presume that some of those Citizens would chearfully accompany the Commissioners, provided their expenses were borne, and perhaps a small compensation made for their time. It might also conduce considerably to the success of the treaty were Mr John Heckewelder to accompany the Commissioners." This amiable and intelligent Man is a teacher of the sect called Moravians, and for several Years resided with the Indians belonging to that sect of the Wyandot and Delaware Tribes, who inhabited the Waters of Muskingum—he well understanding their language—The influence he will have with the said Tribes may be expected to be very considerable. He accompanied General Putnam who speaks highly in praise of his virtues and knowledge of Indian customs—While em- ployed on this business, independent of his expences he has been allowed two and an half dollars p day as a compensation for his services. I have thought it my duty to suggest this subject to your considera- tion, in order that I might learn and execute your directions thereon— I have the honor to be with the highest respect Your most obedient servant H Knox SeC of War The President of the United States. [Endorsed] From The Secretary of War 12th March 1793 '9Ante, p. 443. 40 See Speech of the Six Nations to the President, Stone, Life of Brant, II, 335-336. u Heckewelder was commissioned to go to the conference.
Page 447
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 447 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Misc. Letters: AL] [March 13, 1793] Th: Jefferson has the honor to inclose to the President draughts of the instruments which he suggested as proper to be given formally to each tribe of Indians whose circumstances may call for such a manifes- tation of our views with respect to them. the first is a Letter of protection of the ordinary tenor, except that it declares a protection of the lands as well as the persons & other property, & would be signed by the President under the great seal, the second contains extracts from the late law of the U S. and contains 1. those paragraphs which would shew to the Indians that our laws will punish injuries done them as if done to ourselves. 2. those paragraphs which may answer the purpose of directing those on the spot, when any injury is com- mitted, how & where they are to proceed. if the furnishing such papers should be approved, it will be best to have them printed, on parchment, with the seal, and put into tin cases, so as to give them marks of solemnity which may strike those to whom they are given, or to whom they shall be shewn. Mar. 13. 93 [Endorsed] From The Secy of State 13th March 1793—Circular letter to Indians & Ext. of the law— THE PRESIDENT TO THE HEADS OF THE DEPARTMENTS [SD:Misc. Letters :D«] (Circular) U. S. March 22d 1793 To—The Secretary of State—The Secretary of the Treasury—The Secre- tary of War—and The Attorney General of the U.S. Gentlemen, The treaty which is agreed to be held on or about the first of June next at the lower Sandusky of Lake Erie, being of great moment to the interests & peace of this Country; and likely to be attended with difficulties arising from circumstances (not unknown to you) of a peculiar and embarrassing nature; it is indispensably necessary that our rights under the Treaties which have been entered into with the Six Nations—the several tribes of Indians now in hostil- ity with us—and the claims of others, should be carefully investigated and well ascertained that the Commissioners who are appointed to hold it may be well informed and clearly instructed on all the points 42 This letter is printed in the following publications as of Mar. 21: Sparks (ed.), Writings Washington, X, 328-330; Ford (ed.), Writings Washington, X, 273-274; Cruikshank (ed.), Simcoe Papers, I, 304-305.
Page 448
448 TERRITORIAL PAPERS that are likely to be discussed:43 thereby knowing what they are to insist upon (with or without compensation and the amount of compen- sation if any) and what for the sake of peace they may yield." You are not to learn, from me, the different views which our Citizens entertain of the War we are engaged in with the Indians & how much ** See the President to the Attorney General, Feb. 12, 1793, ante, p. 435, and the Secretary of War to the President, Feb. 16, 1793, ante, p. 436. 44 It is not within the scope of this work to reproduce the great quantity of papers relating to the negotiations conducted with the western and northern Indians in 1793. In selecting the few papers which are included, choice fell upon those most likely to suggest the general policies of the Government, or which for one reason or another appear to have some relationship to other documents in the volume. Yet it is impossible to fully understand the Indian situation in the northwest without an investigation of the sources relating to the negotiations at Niagara and at the mouth of the Detroit River. The failure of the American commissioners to procure a treaty left as the only alternative, according to the views of the United States Government, the use of force; thus General Wayne proceeded against the western Indians and effected the treaty of Greenville (Aug. 3, 1795, post, p. 525). There are several source collections which are reasonably accessible. The most important of these printed collections is A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 340-361, which contains the official report to Congress by the Secretary of War of the preliminaries, actual negotiations, and outcome of the conference. In the Mich. Hist. Colls., xvn, 565-671, are accounts of the "Expedition to Detroit, 1793", written by two Quakers, Jacob Lindley and Joseph Moore, also a letter of Oliver Paxson. In the same series (XII, 43-75, xx, 313-323, xxiv, 516-629), are several letters, among many other relevant papers, which passed between the British officials and the American commissioners that are not included in American State Papers as well as many already published in that collection. The Simcoe Papers (Cruikshank, ed., I, 270-414, II, 4 et seq.) embodies papers which passed between British officials in Canada as well as the American com- missioners and the Indians. Gen. Benjamin Lincoln's "Journal of a treaty held in 1793 with the Indians northwest of the Ohio" has been printed in Mass. Hist. Colls., 3rd ser. vol. v. The MS. of this journal has not been located. Of the MS. sources the greatest collection on this conference is found in the Pickering Papers (MHS). The documents used by the commissioners on which to base their negotiations are here intact, as well as numerous other documents, including all that is published in American State Papers on the subject. See "Historical Index to the Pickering Papers" (Mass. Hist. Colls., 6th ser., vol. VIII). The Washington Papers (LC), contain much in the nature of reports from cabinet officers to the President, particularly those of the Secretary of War, and a seven- teen-page extract of Beverley Randolph's journal (July-August 1793). The original of the journal has not been located, though it was that account of the conference which Washington first read (Randolph to Pickering Oct. 4, 1793, Pickering Papers, MHS.) There are several documents of importance in the Jefferson Papers (LC), most of which can be found in printed form in the above source collections. The MS. file in the United States Senate is the depository for those papers published in American State Papers. In the Archives of the Dominion of Canada (ser. Q, vols. 62, 65, 66, 278, 279.1) are also found many relevant papers. The diplomatic background and history of our relations with Great Britain concerning the western posts as well as the Indian situation have been treated fully in Bemis, Jay Treaty, passim.
Page 449
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 449 these different opinions add to the delicacy and embarrassments alluded to above—nor the criticisms which, more than probable, will be made on the subject if the proposed Treaty shd be unsuccessful. Induced by these motives, and desirous that time may be allowed for a full & deliberate consideration of the subject before the depar- ture of the Commissioners, it is my desire that you will on the 25th day of this instant meet together at the War Office (where the docu- ments are) with such papers as you may respectively be possess'd of & wch I shall cause to be laid before y[ou] then & there, or at such other time or place as you may agree upon, decide on all the points which you shall conceive necessary for the information and instruction of the Commissioners—and having drawn them into form, to revise the same & have them ready in a finished state for my perusal and con- sideration when I return—together with a digest of such references as shall be adjudged necessary for the Commissioners to take with them.— And, as it has been suggested to me, that the Society of Quakers, are desirous of sending a deputation from their body to be present at the aforesaid treaty (which if done with pure motives, & a disposition accordant with those sentiments entertained by Governmt respecting boundary may be a mean of facilitating the good work of peace) you will consider how far, if they are approved characters, they ought to be recognized in the Instructions to the Commissioners—& how proper it may be for them to participate therein or to be made acquainted therewith.—45 [Endorsed] Circular To the Secretary of State D° of the Treasury D° of War—& The Atty Gen1 of the U. S. 22d March 1793 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE TURNER [SD:Dom. Letters, v:C] Philadelphia March 30th 1793. The Honh,e Judge Turner. Sir, Having received letters from Mr Sargent, Secretary and acting Governor of the North-Western territory, stating the extreme incon- veniences which the people of that territory are experiencing from the absence of that body which constitutes both their legislature and ju- diciary, I think it my duty to inclose you copies thereof, not doubting but that you will duly feel the urgency of their calls for your presence.48 I have the honor to be with great respect, Sir, &c. Th: Jefferson. "See the President to the Secretary of War, Apr. 5,1793, Sparks (ed.), Writings Washington, X, 334-335. *» See Sargent to St. Clair, Feb. 6, 1793, ante, p. 430, and to the Secretary of State, Feb. 7, 1793, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 407. 126650—34 30
Page 450
450 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Misc. Letters: D] Mount Vernon Apr1 5th 1793. Dear Sir, Your letter of the 18t instant came to my hands yester- day.—I regret the indisposition of General Knox; but hope, as there is yet time for consideration of those matters I referred to the heads of the departments, no inconvenience will result from the delay occa- sioned thereby unless it shd continue much longer.—At George Town I met Mr Randolph;—& by a letter just recd from Mr Lear, I am in- formed that General Lincoln was expected to be in Philadelphia about the middle of this Week. I am so much surprized, and mortified at the Conduct of Judge Turner, that if he should be in Philadelphia at the receipt of this letter, & not the least evidence of his proceeding to the N° Western Territory immediately It is my desire that you will, in my name express to him, as far as my powers will authorise you to do, that I can no longer sub- mit to such abuses of public trust without instituting (if I have powers to set it on foot) an enquiry into his conduct.47—The same with respect to the Governor of that territory—Such remissness in these Gentlemen not only reflects upon the common rules of propriety but must implicate me in the shamefulness of their conduct, in suf- fering it.— I hope the acct brought by the Capt" from Lisbon had no better foundation than that suggested in your letter; for I shd be sorry to receive a confirmation of it.— It was prudent, however, to guard against an event which might have proved unfortunate in case of the Capture of the Pact With esteem &c I am, G° Washington [Endorsed] To The Secy of State 5 April 1793. JOHN ROME TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [SF:3 Cong., 1 seaa.:ALS] Philadelphie le 14 avril 1793 Mons1eur Dans L'entretien que vous avés eu ce matin avec Mr Putnam, au Sujet du contract passé entre la Comp" du Scioto et celle de L'Ohio, en faveur des habitants de Gallipolis, vous aves paru faire peu d'attention a une circonstance tres frappante, et Sur la quelle a la vérité Mr Putnam m'a paru glisser legérement.—Je vous a dit que lorsque la Comp" de L'Ohio au commencement de l'année derniere régler Ses comptes avec le Congres, Le contract en question fut envoye au tr&orier de cette Comp", avec un Pouvoir général d'entirer le meilleur parti qu'il lui Seroit possible. Mr Putnam a ajouté qu'il « See the Secretary of State to Turner, Apr. 17, 1793, post, p. 452.
Page 451
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 451 ignoroit entieremt quel avoit £té le r&ultat de la negotiation du tresorier.—En admettant que Mr Putnam Soit r&llement dans l'ignorance a cet 6gard, pourquoi vous avoit il dit quelque minutes auparavant que la Comp" de L'Ohio n'avoit rien recu pour ce con- tract, puisqu'il est au contraire tres probable que le trésorier a pu recevoir depuis ce tems, de quelque uns des membres Solvables de la Ce du Scioto, leur proportion du payement: et qu'il avoit meme des moyens de Se faire payer par Duer et par Flint, qui possedoient chacun un certain nombre d'actions dans la Comp" de l'ohio—cette matiere me Semble importante a eclaircir, et je crois que Mr Putnam pourroit a cet egard vous donner de meilleurs renseignemens que personne, s'il vouloit. J'ai L'honneur d'etre avec Respect Monsieur Votre tres Humble et tres obto Serviteur Rome [Addressed] The Attorney G" of the United States Vine Street Philadelphia [Endorsed] L. 1" Sess: 3d Con. Letter to the Attorney General U. S. from Mr Rome. April 14t h 1793. [Translation] Philadelphia, April 14, 1793. My dear Sir: In the conversation which you had this morning with Mr. Putnam, regarding the contract concluded between the Scioto Company and the Ohio Company, in favor of the inhabitants of Gallipolis, you seemed to pay little attention to a very striking circumstance which Mr. Putnam, it seemed to me, really passed over lightly. I told you that when the Ohio Company settled its accounts with Congress at the beginning of last year, the contract in question was sent to the treasurer of that company with a general authoriza- tion to draw from it the greatest possible advantage. Mr. Putnam added that he had no information whatever as to what had been the result of the treasurer's negotiation. If we admit that Mr. Putnam really has no information on this point, why did he tell you a few minutes before that the Ohio Company had not received anything for that contract, since it is, on the contrary, very probable that the treasurer may have received since that time from some of the solvent members of the Scioto Company, their proportion of the payment; and that he even had the means of obtaining payment from Duer and from Flint, each one of whom owned a certain number of shares in the Ohio Company—it seems to me important to clear up this matter, and I believe that Mr. Putnam could, if he wished, give you better information on this subject than any one else. I have the honor to be, Sir, your very respectful, humble, and obedient servant. Rome
Page 452
452 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE TURNER [SD: Dom. Letters, v: C] Philadelphia, April 17th1793. The Honh1" Judge Turner— Sir, The inconveniences which have resulted to the Territory of the United States, northwest of the Ohio, from the absence of the legislative and judiciary bodies, and the length of time you have in particular been absent have rendered it necessary, in the opinion of the President, that some legal enquiry into the causes of it should be instituted: and I have it in charge from him to inform you, that the Attorney General of the United States is instructed to consider and to do what may be proper on the occasion." I have the honor to be with great esteem & respect, Sir, &c. Th: Jefferson. PROCLAMATION OF GENERAL ANTHONY WAYNE [MHS: Pickering Papers :C"] A PROCLAMATION [April 22, 1793] By his Excellency Anthony Wayne, Esquire, Major General and Commander in Chief of the Legion of the United States of America. Whereas the President of the United States of America did nom- inate and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, has appointed three commissioners to hold a treaty with the hostile Indians at the Lower Sandusky on or about the first day of June next, ensuing, to endeavour to effect a permanent peace with those Indians: And whereas it would be highly improper, that any hostile attempts should be made against any of the Indian towns or settlements, whilst the aforesaid treaty is pending. I am therefore ordered by the President, and I do, hereby, in his name, most solemnly forbid and restrain any attempts being made against any of the Indian towns or settlements until the result of the treaty is known. Given under my hand and seal at Head-Quarters, Legionville, this 22d day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety three, and in the seventeenth year of the Independence of the United States. Anthony Wayne. By order of the Commander in Chief. H. DeButts, A.D.C. [Endorsed] Proclamations &c. inclosed in General Knox's letter of June 6th 1793 «8 See also the President to the Secretary of State, Mar. 10 and Apr. 5, 1793, ante, pp. 443, 450. 4• From a newspaper clipping, without identification.
Page 453
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 453 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [MHS: Sargent Papers :LS] War department April 2A. 1793— Sir, The President of the United States has particularly directed me to inform you that the proposed treaty with the hostile Indians North of the Ohio will be held at lower Sandusky about the first of June next—That during the continuance of the Treaty it is of the highest importance to the success thereof, as well as to the safety of the Commissioners that all hostile incursions of the white Inhabit- ants into or near to the Indian Country North of the Ohio should be absolutely prohibited, until after the Treaty be closed— The Commanding General of the Troops has been directed to issue a proclamation to this effect; and the President requests that you would be pleased to take such measures in the premisses with your frontier Citizens as shall in your judgment be most effectual to prevent a measure which might be attended with highly pernicious conse- quences 60 I am Sir Your humble servant— H Knox Secy of War Governor Sl Clair [Endorsed] Gen1 Knox 24th April 1793 to Col. Winthrop Sargent No. 14. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA [LC: Washington Papers: LS] War department April 24. 1793. Slr I have the honor to receive your letter of the 12th inst and to submit it to the President of the United States. While it is acknowledged that the frontier Citizens ought to be effectually protected against actual dangers it is to be observed that it is difficult and perhaps impracticable to guard against all possible dangers of stragling Indians—The measure therefore adopted on the part of the Executive of directing General Wood to the scene of appre- hended danger is highly judicious in order to judge of the real state of things. It has been hoped that the proposed treaty with the Indians North of the Ohio would have restrained entirely their depredations until the result should have been known. And although this will probably M See St. Clair to the Secretary of War, May 11,1793, Pickering Papers (MHS), and to Sargent, May 15, 1793, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 454
454 TERRITORIAL PAPERS be the case as it may respect any invasion by considerable bodies of Indians, yet the principles of Government among the savage tribes are too little understood and their manner of living too dispersed to expect that every individual Indian will obey what is understood to have been the injunction of their Councils forbidding any Warriors from acting on our frontiers. The President of the United States has particularly directed me to inform your Excellency that the proposed Treaty will be held at lower Sandusky to commence about the first of June next. That during the continuance of the Treaty it is of the highest importance to the success thereof, as well as to the safety of the Commissioners that all hostile incursions of the White Inhabitants into or near to the Indian Country North of the Ohio should be absolutely prohibited until after the Treaty be closed51 The Commanding General of the Troops has been directed to issue a proclamation to this effect, and the President requests that you would be pleased to take such measures in the premises with your frontier Citizens as shall in your judgment be most effectual to pre- vent a measure which might be attended with highly pernicious consequences— I have the honor to be with great esteem Your Excellencys humble servant H Knox His Excellency Governor Lee THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE INDIAN COMMISSIONERS [MHS:Pickering Papers:LS] War department April 29th 1793— Gentlemen In case that you should unfortunately fail in effect- ing a treaty with the hostile Indians, you will please to write a letter of the following form, (transmitting by different conveyances at least six Copies signed by all of you) to Major General Wayne who will be at Fort Washington on the Ohio— "We were at Sandusky [blank] days—Although we did not effect a peace, yet we hope that good may hereafter arise from the mission. The tranquillity of the Country North West of the Ohio during the continuance of the Treaty evinced your Care of our safety, and we could not leave this quarter without returning you our unfeigned thanks." 62 61 See proclamation of the Governor of Virginia, May 13, 1793 (Co!. Va. State Papers, vi, 370) pursuant to this request. 52 On Aug. 23, 1793, the commissioners forwarded such a letter to Wayne (A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 359). See also the commissioners to Wayne, Aug. 21, 1793, ibid., pp. 359-360, which contains an elaborate explanation.
Page 455
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 455 Instead of the form of the Treaty mentioned in your general instructions, the extract of a Letter herein enclosed from the Attorney General, will show you his opinion generally on the subject of the form which may be proper to be observed 63 I am Gentlemen with great respect Your humble servant H Knox Secy of War Benjamin Lincoln Beverly Randolph & Timothy Pickering Esqr Commissioners &c [Endorsed] Col° Pickering April 29.1793. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, n:ALS] Greensburgh June 8tn 1793 Sir You will probably be surprised to see a Letter from me of this date from this place The Delay I have met with in this Country has distressed me extremly, but it has been unavoidable; for I have been at the very point of Death: and now I am so far recovered only as to be barely able to ride but still too weak to walk more than a few yards at a time: nevertheless, I am on my way to Pittsburgh to avail myself of the first Opportunity to descend the River where indeed I ought to have been long ago. My Duty requires me to account for not being there which will I hope be my Excuse for obtruding myself—One more such Attack will probably stop the Scene forever. With the sincerest and most fervent Wishes for your Health and Happiness I have the Honor to be Sir Your most obedient Servant Ar Sl Clair The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Governor Sl Clair 8 June 1793— THE INDIAN COMMISSIONERS TO THE PRESIDENT [MHS: Pickering Papers :C] [July 10, 1793] Sir, General Knox will of course lay before you our Communica- tions of this date.M—We address you that we may literally comply with our promise to the Deputies of the Western Indians, "that we would desire you to issue fresh orders to Gen1 Wayne, not only to 53 See the Secretary of War to the commissioners, June 6, 1793, Pickering Papers (MHS). * A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 351.
Page 456
456 TERRITORIAL PAPERS abstain from hostilities, but to remain quietly at his posts, untill the event of the treaty should be known.65 "—Our sentiments on this subject are fully expressed in our letter to the Sec: of war, to which we must beg leave to refer.—Those sentiments your own solicitude for peace will sufficiently enforce. We are, Sir, with great respect, Y' &— B. L. B. R. T. P. Niagara 10th July 1793. [Endorsed] Copy of a letter to the President of the United States July 10th 1793 55 PROCLAMATION OF GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [MHS: Sargent Papers :C] Territory of the United States Northwest of the River Ohio [August 6, 1793] Arthur St Clair Esqr Governour and Commander in Chief of the Territory aforesaid— To all Persons to whom these Presents shall come Greeting— Whereas by a Commission under the Seal of the Territory to William Goforth, William Wells and William McMillan Esquires bearing Date the 4th of January A.D. 1790 they were constituted and appointed Judges of the Court of Common Pleas from the County of Hamilton and They or a Majority of them authorised and empow- ered therein to hear and determine all manner of Pleas Actions Suits and Causes of a civil Nature real personal and mixed according to the Constitution and Laws of the Territory57— Now Know ye that for divers good Causes me thereunto moving I have thought proper to supersede the Commission granted to the before named William Goforth, William Wells and William McMillan authorising and empowering them or a majority of them to hold a Court of common Pleas and therein to hear, and determine all manner of Pleas actions Suits and Causes of a civil Nature real personal and mixed and the said Commission is hereby superseded of Which all persons but more especially the before named William Goforth, William Wells and William M'Millan are to take Notice and Govern themselves accordingly68— In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and caused the Seal of the Territory to be affixed and there Letters to be made patent « A.S.P., op. c«.,pp. 349-351; Mich. Hist. Colls., xxvi, 560-568. M Answered July 20, 1793, Pickering Papers (MHS). 57 Journal Exec. Procs., Jan. 4, 1790, post, in, 295. "Ibid., Aug. 6, 1793, p. 413. See also ibid., Feb. 5, 1793, p. 405; and the judges to Sargent, same date, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 457
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 457 at Cincinnati in the County of Hamilton this Sixth Day of August A. D. 1793— [Endorsed] revokal of a gen1 Commission GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C] Cincinnati County of Hamilton Augt 9h 1793 Sir,-I have had the honor to receive your letter of the 19th of April" together with the ten Volumes of the Acts passed at the 2d Session of the second Congress, which shall be distributed in such manner as to render an acquaintance with them as general as possible. In my progress to this Place Having halted at Marietta to see the Magis- trates and enquire a little into the State of that Settlement, and an Opportunity to Pittsburgh presenting at the Moment, on the 25 of July60 I issued a Proclamation for the meeting of the Legislature of the Territory on the first of September at this Place, and took the Liberty to enclose a Copy of it to you, with a request that you would cause copies to be sent to the Judges Symmes and Turner, neither of whom I knew where to find, but it was probable their residence might be known to you—I am very sensible Sir, this was a Liberty that demands an apology, and I was sensible of the impropriety at the time—and nothing would have induced me to take it but the uncer- tainty as to the places where they were to be found, and the expence that would have attended the sending an Express, if one could have been obtained, which would have been difficult.—Be assured Sir, unless it should be a very pressing Case indeed I shall not take it again. I have the pleasure to inform you that the difficulties which existed with respect to the Court of Common Pleas for this County are ac- commodated in a manner that gives Satisfaction, and any irregularities that have happened in their proceedings will, I hope be helped by the Legislature at the same time the Dignity of the Government has not been committed, nor the just and necessary prerogative of the Gov- ernor weakened. the particulars have been communicated to the At- torney General61 and I have at the same time made some Observations upon some of the Laws passed here at the last Session of the Legisla- ture, and may possibly make some more, but I realy do not know whether it is to him or to you that the Laws of this Territory are referred,62 for consideration tho it should seem of course that they be 58 Not found. M Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 412. "May 9, 1793; see Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 312-316. •» See the Secretary of State to St. Clair, Sept. 13, 1793, post, p. 460.
Page 458
458 TERRITORIAL PAPERS referred to him.—this may be considered as a work of supererogation in me—but Sir the circumstances of different parts of this Territory are extremely dissimilar, and it is very difficult to adopt Law general Laws to those variant Circumstances, and the operation of the Laws falling more immediately within the observation of the Governor, than of any Person at the Seat of Government, tho infinitely better qualified to judge of them in the abstract, I have presumed that it would not be deemed an intrusion and should it be to you they are referred, and you will permit me any Observations which I may think necessary, shall be addressed to you. With Sentiments of the greatest Esteem and respect I have the honor to be Sir Your most obedient and most humble Servant. The honorable Thomas Jefferson Secy of State— [Endorsed] Copy to Mr Jefferson Secy of State Augt 9h 1793 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [LC: Hamilton Papers :ALS] (private) Cincinnati, County of Hamilton August 9th 1793. Sir, I have observed with pleasure the Measures you are pur- suing, to make it more apparently the interest of the People in the western Counties of Pennsylvania to comply with the Excise Laws—it was their real interest before. The Opposition began with the Distillers who were in a combination against the People, but it has been fostered since by others, and for very bad purposes. To assist you the little that may be in my power, I will, if possible, pro- cure a Law at the next Session of the Legislature, which is called for the first of September, forbidding the importation of all ardent Spirits into the Territory the Duties upon which have not been either paid or secured,63 and if I should fail in it, Congress I suppose will not leave this Country open as a receptacle for the manufacture of a part of their People, in a State little short of actual Rebellion— and it [is] this Country that is their principal Market—and I mention it to you now, that you may think of it and put it in train if it meets your approbation. Indeed, should I succeed, I would be glad even to see the Law disapproved, and another enacted by Congress to the same purpose, for it is already time that the People of this Country should be put in Mind that they are not yet a part of the Union, but dependent upon it.8* I have heard that we are threatened with a War with Spain—I hope a St. Clair failed to have such a law passed in the ensuing session. M See St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, July 24,1795, post, p. 523, and act of June 5, 1794, 1 Stat. 378-381.
Page 459
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 459 in God we shall not be involved with any of the European Powers, for at present a War with one seems to be nearly allied with a War with several others. But if the Business was settled on that continent, and the present confederacy disolved, which a Campaign, that is not decidedly successful against France, will I think certainly dissolve, and this cursed Indian War at an end, of which I but little prospect at present—to the western People it would be the most desirable thing possible.—but I fear instead of Peace with them the Season for offen- sive Operation will be wasted in fruitless negociation, and a more Extensive and formidable confederacy of the Savages than ever was known will be the Result. I sincerely hope and pray that I may be mistaken. I have a Letter from the Kaskaskias of the 2d of June" which speaks of the Spaniards arming themselves on the upper parts of the Missisippi, and I have given an extract to the Secretary of War, which will I suppose be communicated to the President if he thinks it of consequence enough, and of course to you The Writer is a respect- able and intelligent Man, and would not give me information he did not himself believe.—When he resided at Detroit, I received much useful Intelligence thro' him. In compassion to a poor Devil banished to another Planet, but like the Soul of some departed Sinner as they left us, still hovering about that he had left, tell me what is doing in Yours, if you can snatch a Moment from the weighty Cares of your Office. Whether you do or not I shall always find myself deeply interested in your Fame and Fortune. I pray you to make my best Respects to M" Hamilton, and with the best wishes I can possibly form, truly and affectionately I Am Dear Sir Your most obedient servant Ar S» Clair Alexander Hamilton Esquire The Indians, the night before last, took off fourteen of the Con- tractors Horses within four Miles of this Place. [Endorsed] Cincinnati August 9th 1793 Arthur Sl Clair private THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE SYMMES [SD: Dom. Letters, v: C] Philadelphia Aug. 11. 1793 Honh1" Judge Symes Sir, Governor Sinclair has inclosed me a proclamation dated July 24,69 and summoning the legislature of the North-Western terri- tory to meet at Cincinnati, on the 1" day of September, of which he desired me to notify yourself & Judge Turner. it is out of my power - From William St. Clair, St. Clair Papers (OSL). » Journal Exec. Procs., July 25, 1793, post, ill, 412.
Page 460
460 TERRITORIAL PAPERS to do it as to the latter, as I do not know where he is.S7 I have the honor to be, with great respect, Sir, &c1 Th: Jefferson THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:Dom. Letters:v:C] Philadelphia Sep. 13. 1793. To Gov Sinclair— Dear Sir, I received yesterday your favor of Augt 9.M—Your having endeavored to avail the public of my agency in convening your legislature needed no apology. I did it with pleasure, as a public Servant, and as one willing to serve yourself.69 Judge Symes however was at a distance, and Judge Turner gone from hence. With respect to the question to whom you should send your observations on the laws relating to your Government, I can answer with more disinterested- ness, as before they can come, I shall be no longer in my Office. All the business of the Government is divided into 3. departments, to wit, of War, finance & State: to some one of the heads of these every possi- ble matter belongs. as to whatever you have to do in your military Capacity, you refer yourself to the Secretary at War. I do not know that you can ever have anything to do in the line of Finance. every thing else falls into the department of State, to the head of which it should be addressed—to him the general report, given every Six Months, is referred, and if there are matters in it proper for the other departments he reports them to the President who sends the extracts to the proper department.—whether in or out of Office, I shall ever be happy to render you any service I can, being with sincere respect Dear Sir, &ca Th: Jefferson A PROCLAMATION BY GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD: Misc. Letters: C] [December 8, 1793] By Arthur Sl Clair Governor of the Territory of the united States northwest of the River Ohio A PROCLAMATION ™ Whereas a War at present exists in Europe between France on the one part and certain other Powers on the other part, and although the « See St. Clair to the Secretary of State, Aug. 9,1793, ante, p. 457. M Loe. eit. "See the Secretary of State to Symmes, Aug. 11, 1793, supra. 70 This copy, which was sent to the Department of State, is in St. Clair's hand. See the Secretary of State to the President, Feb. 15, 1794, post, p. 476.
Page 461
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 461 United States are allied to France, yet they are not Parties to this War, but are at Peace with all the other Powers, and in particular with Spain, from which political situation results, by the Law of Nations, the Duty a strict neutrality, and a Conduct perfectly equal and impar- tial towards all the belligerent Powers, the observation of which neutrality has been enjoined upon the Citizens of the united states by the President in his Proclamation bearing date the 22d day of April 1793; And it having been communicated to me thro the Secretary of War that Representations have been made to the President by the Representatives of Spain of the designs of certain Frenchmen by the Names of la Chaise,71 Charles Delpeau, Mathurin and Signoux to excite and engage as many as they could of our Citizens or others to undertake an Expedition against the spanish settlements within our Neighbourhood I have thought fit to issue this Proclamation enjoining all the Inhabitants of the Territory of the united States north west of the River Ohio to observe a strict neutrality towards Spain; and to abstain from every Act of hostility against the Subjects and Settle- ments of that crown, and strictly forbidding all and every of the said Inhabitants to join themselves to the said la Chaise, Charles Depeau, Mathurin and Signoux or either of them in any attempt they may meditate or undertake against the spanish settlements on the Mis- sisippi, or to aid and abett them in the same in any manner whatsoever: And all Persons who shall offend in the Premises may depend upon being prosecuted and punished with the utmost rigor of the Law: And I do hereby require and command all Officers civil and military to use their utmost endeavours to prevent the said la Chaise &c* or either of them from making any levies of Men or other preparation for their intended Expedition within the Territory and to imprison them should they have the audacity to attempt it, and to restrain all and every of the Inhabitants from joining themselves to them or either of them. In testimony whereof I have caused the Seal of the Territory to be affixed to these Presents, and have signed the same with my Hand. Done at the City of Marietta in the County of Washington the 8th day of December 1794 [1793] and of the Independance of the united States the seventeenth Year Signed Ar Sl Clair [Endorsed] recd febT. 13.94. 7 1 See Sargent to the Secretary of War, Oct. 29,1792, ante, p. 413.
Page 462
462 TERRITORIAL PAPERS J. ROME TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:ALS] 26th December 1793 Sir Having been called out of the city of Philadelphia by some private business, which absolutely required my presence, and my best exertions, I think it my duty to recommend to your kindness and vigilance the concerns of the French Settlers of Gallipolis—you know better than myself the various incidents of that unfortunate affair, and how little we must depend on the good will, or on the abilities of the individuals who engaged in it, to comply with the terms of their bargain.—The inhabitants of Gallipolis are by no means able to prose- cute in law the Authors of their misery: admitting then that the pro- secution should be carried on in the name of The United States; who knows better than you the length of time requisite to bring such a prosecution to an issue. in either case I consider the ruin of the Settle- ment as equally unavoidable. the circumstances of the Settlers are such that the least uncertainty or delay must quite wear out their constancy almost exhausted by the many disapointments and difficul- ties they had to struggle with, for the space of three years. Should The United States think it of some importance, to increase the population and to strengthen the defence of this part of their frontiers, they must give some encouragement to a Settlement which in the present circumstances, may reasonably be considered as the basis of a very considerable foreign population. the only proper encouragement in my opinion, would be a provisional grant of fifty thousand acres of Land, as they were granted last year by the house of representatives; in consideration of which grant, the Settlers would abandon to the United States all their rights and pretensions both on the ohio and Scioto companies. I mention only the Settlers of Gallipolis, because I have no authority to compromise for the rest of the French purchasers, and because their pretensions are considerably higher, the total purchase being supposed to amount to four hundred thousand acres. Since our last interview Sir I have seen Mr Elsworth and Brown. both of them agreed to insist on your report being presented to the Senate as soon as possible. the succes of our demand, they said, depended in a great measure on the early period of the presentation. I could not procure here a print of the engraved map which had been delivered to each purchaser by the agents of the Comp1 in Paris. but be assured the boundaries of the Ohio and Scioto Comp9 on that map, were fixed by a line running South and North from the mouth of the big Kanhawa River. I dare say there are at least a hundred copies of it in the hands of the Settlers at Gallipolis. Mr Sergeant who's still in Philadelphia would probably procure it: he lodges in Strawberry alley N. 28.
Page 463
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 463 I am absolutely ignorant of the time at which my private concerns will admit of my going back to Philadelphia: your report to the Senate is quite independent of my presence there. and beside I am writing to Mr Brown by this opportunity. I would consider it Sir as a particular favour to receive a few lines from you marking the time at which you will make your report72 as well as the General Purport of it. The Person who has been intrusted with this letter, has been directed to send from time to time to your house to know if you have any message for me. my business calling me from place to place I thought that way more expedient than the post to receive safely what you will think proper to Direct73 I have the Honour to be with respect Sir your most obdt Humb. Sert Rome The attorney GaI of the Un. States [Endorsed] L. !" Sess: 3d Con: Rome recd Jany 3. 1793 [1794]. SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:N.W. Terr. Papers, n:ALS] Philadelphia Dec1 30th 1793 Sir Conscious as I am that the Duties of a public Servant should precede his every other Consideration, and extreme anxious at all times to observe such Propriety of Conduct as may meet the full Approbation of the sovereign Authority of the United States, I feel it incumbent upon me to explain the Causes of my Absence from the northwestern Territory at this Time. In the August of 1790 74 I had the honour of representing to you that my Expenses as Secretary of said Territory far exceeded the Salary affixed to that Office, and in the December following by per- mission of Governor St Clair (having made provision for the Discharge of my public Duties) was attendant upon Congress in an Essay for Compensation: A memorial was presented to the Senate and house of representa- tives and refered to the Secretary of the Treasury76—but before the same could be reported upon (Governour Sl Clair arriving in this City) your pleasure for my immediate return to his Government was signified to me— To the present moment the Secretary of the Treasury has been so much and so importantly engaged that no attention could be be- n Mar. 22, 1794; see A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 29-30. 73 See report of House committee, Feb. 14, 1793, ante, p. 435. m Aug. 1, 1790, ante, p. 295. 7S [December], 1790, ante, p. 318.
Page 464
464 TERRITORIAL PAPERS stowed to my memorial,76 and in far the greatest part of the inter- vening Time I have been involved in all the Duties and Expenses of both Governor and Secretary of the western Territory rendered, in a pecuniary point of View, in the last year peculiarly distressing from the failure of some private resources—And from which Consideration I was induced to solicit Leave of Absence from Duty for a few months through General Knox, in whose Sense of propriety it being inadmis- sible the request was never made, and I remained in the Territory to the absolute Sacrifice of more than the amount of my whole pay as Secretary thereof until the Governours return and permission liberated me (after providing for the Secretary's Duties) in the late Autumn, to urge my petition to the general Government and adjust some private Concerns 77— This representation I have conceived it my Duty to make to you Sir, and I flatter myself it will apologize for my being in Philadelphia with Sentiments of the highest respect I have the honour to be Sir your most obedient and humble Servant Winthrop Sargent. The President of the United States [Endorsed] From Winthrop Sargent 30 Decr 1793. OBSERVATIONS ON THE PETITION OF THE FRENCH INHABITANTS OF GALLIPOLIS [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:AD] [1793 ej The petition of the French inhabitants of Gallipolis, consists of two distincts and Separate objects. and they beg leave to Submitt to the Hhl° Comittee call'd to make this report on that petition, few observa- tions which may in some measure facilitate their decisions on the Subject. One of the objects of the petition of the sd inhabitants is to ask a portion of lands equal to the purchase they made in france in the year 1790 from the Scioto Comp1 the motives on which their demand is grounded, are the deception they experienced from the agents of that company, the considerable expences they have been Subject to, in coming and bringing over a great number of workmen—the increase of population brought into a desert country exposed to the excursions of the indians, whom they may oppose even in their now distressed Situation with hundred and fifty fighting men. the calamities of an indian war, their courage and constancy in struggling against them, the title they have got to the humanity and n See report of the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 31, 1794, post, p. 473. "Cf. statement of Sargent, May, 1794, post, p. 480.
Page 465
465 particular attention of Government, by being foreigners and french- men, impos'd upon, and ruin'd by american Speculators. all those considerations together, induce them to believe that Congress will and they dare Say must treat them in a generous manner: and the sd inhabitants hope and expect Congress will add to the Small portion of land they have right to by their purchase in france, a generous grant, which will enable them in future times, to make up for their pass'd distresses.—they dare Say it would be a good policy to do it. is there any private person owner of two millions of acres of unsettled land, who would refuse two hundred and fifty individuals, a small comparative portion of hundred thousand acres of that land—to make the rest of it more valuable. the agents of the Spanish Government have made to the french inhabitants of Gallipolis, proposals of a higher nature, they never listened to, not withstanding their very distress'd Situation, on account of the confidence they allways put in the liber- ality and generous dispositions of Congress towards them.—another consideration of some weight, is that there is at least a third part of the inhabitants of Gallipolis who come to this country bound as workmen, who have not any landed property and by no means able to get any The Second object of the sd petition, and which Seems at the first view present the greatest difficulties, is the demand of the sd inhab- itants of Keeping the lands on which they are now Settled, a certain fact is that it is out of the power of the greatest part of them, to move from the lands they have cleared and the houses they have build, which are now their only ressource: On the other hand it is evident, and the inhabitants of Gallipolis do not want to be told, that it is out of the power of the Legislature to dispossess any private person or any body of men of their lawfull property. it is generally said and indeed we believe the Ohio Com- pany owns the Same lands on which we are now Settled. but has not the ohio company means Sufficient to compensate for those lands? did not Congress make a grant to that comp1 of hundred thousand acres of land to be distributed among the Settlers on their purchase? have not the french Settlers at Gallipolis right to their proportional share thereof? did the legislature fix a particular spot of land for the purpose? and Supposing it has been done, could not the legislature in favour of the sd petitioners undo that particular clause of the act, and cover with thirty or fourty thousand acres of that land the improvements and purchase of the inhabitants of Gallipolis—the petitioners Submit their observations to the Superior Knowledge of the committee, convinced as they are of their liberal dispositions in behalf of their just claim. [Endorsed] L. 1" Sess: 3d Con: Observations on the petition of the French inhabitants of Gallipolis 13M40—34 81
Page 466
466 TERRITORIAL PAPERS STATEMENT OF JOHN ROME: THE FRENCH SETTLERS AT GALLIPOLIS [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:ALS] [1793 c] Le 23 et le 27 juillet 1787, Le congres passa deux résolutions, donnant â Manasse Cuttler et Winthrop Sergent et leurs associés, Le droit de préemption du terrein compris entre la Septieme rangée de munici- palitiés, la Riviere d'ohio, et la Riviere du Scioto et certaines bornes fixées vers le nord. E n conséquence de ces deux résolutions, Manassé Cuttler et Win- throp Sergent entrerent le 27 du mois d'octobre de la même année en négotiation avec le conseil de la trésorerie des Etats unis, pour faire l'acquisition d'une partie de ce terrein, au nom de la compeé de L'ohio— et quand â l'autre partie du terrein sur le quel s'etendoit le droit du préemption, ils entrerent en marché le même jour avec le conseil de la trésorerie pour leur propre compte. Le 29 du même mois d'octobre 1787, Cuttler et Sergent et leurs associés d'un coté, et Wm Duer et ses associés d'autre part, passerent un acte d'association, reçu par Jean Wilkes notaire public de New- york. par cet acte Cuttler et Sergent cedent et transportent â Duer leurs droits et prétentions en égale moitié sur le susdit terrein, et éta- blissent un droit égal et inséparable dans les dispositions qu'on pourrait faire de ce terrein tant en Europe—qu'en Amérique.—ils autorisent Wm Duer â engager ou a vendre Le dt terrein en Hollande ou dans éelle autre partie de l'europe qu'il le jugera, et a y envoyer pour cet tffet un agent pour travailler â la dte négotiation conformément aux instructions qu'il recevroit de lui bien entendu cependant que Wm Duer communiqueroit de tems en tems, ou quand il en seroit requis par Cuttler et Sergent les propres de négociation.—X Duer S'engage â avancer La Somme de cent mille Dollarts X et D'autant est il dit que le bénéfice de la préférence pour ce terrein depend du payement éxact de la part de la comp" de l'ohio de la moitié du pris d'achat du terrein pour le quel elle a contracté X En conséquence de cet acte, Duer envoya en france Joel Barlow en Qualité d'agent, lui donnant pouvoir au nom de la comp" du Scioto, de vendre ou d'engager pour quelque Somme qu'il jugera convenable, telle partie ou parties du dit terrein qu'il jugera convenable et S'en- gageant au nom de Sa comp", et par les pouvoirs qui lui Sont donnés, â ratifier tous les marchés que Le dl Barlow pourroit conclure avec quelque corps au quelque particulier que ce puisse etre. D'aprés ces pouvoirs, Barlow vendit en France â une comp" formée Sous le nom de la comp" du Scioto, par un acte passe devant Rameau not" â paris le 3 aout 1789. cette comp" nomma pour Ses agents Wm Playfair et chaiss de Soissons, qui conjointement avec Barlow, vendi-
Page 467
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 467 rent en detail des portions du terrein ci dessus, â un grand nombre de particuliers francais â la fin de l'année 1789 et au commencement de 1790. dans le courant de cette derniere année, Barlow vendit â une autre comp" francaise les parties de ce terrein qui n'avoiens pas été vendues par la premiere, et cette Seconde comp" vendit Sur le champ diverses parties de ce terrein â plusieurs particuliers. Dans la description du terrein qui avoit été communiquée aux divers achetteurs francais, Le terrein de la comp" du Scioto était censé S'étendre depuis cette riviere le long de l'ohio jusqu'à L'embouchure du grand Kanhawa—â leur arrivée en Amérique les francais furent reçus par Wm Duer en Qualité de Sur Intendant de la comp" du Scioto, il traita avec eux en cette qualité, et en attendant que les préparatifs et les arpentages nécéssaires pour leur distribuer les terreins qu'ils avoient achettées pussent etre faits, il donna â chacun d'eux deux lots de ville et un lot de quatre acres, Sur le terrein de Gallipolis—et ce Sont lâ toutes les terres dont ils ont en la jouissance depuis leur arrivée en amérique. Je dis la jouissance parce que quoique ce terrein fut Censé etre compris dans Le droit de préemption de la compe du Scioto, il appartenoit en effect â cette de l'ohio, avec la quelle la premiere avait traité au moment de l'arrivée des francais—mais les conditions du traité n'ayant pas été remplies par la premiere La Seconde réclame ses droits. Les défrichements de Gallipolis ne S'etendent encore qu'a quatre au cinq cents acres de terre: et je Suis fondé â croire que cinq au Six mille acres autour de cet établissement, pourroient Satisfaire les habitants qui y sont fixés â présent, Sans Barrer les droits qu'ils ont sur le terrein qu'ils ont achetté en france de la comp" du Scioto. associates of the associates of the Ohio company Scioto company Me Cuttler Wm Duer Wint" Sergent Me Cuttler Ruf. putnam Wintp Sergent green Guilman Ruf putnam tupper Cregey Meggs constable [Endorsed] L. 1" Sess: 3d Con: Mr Rome's Statet [Translation] [1793 c] On the 23d and the 27th of July, 1787, Congress passed two reso- lutions, giving to Manassé Cuttler and Winthrop Sergent and their associates the right of preemption of the land comprised between the seventh range of townships, the Ohio River, and the Scioto River and certain boundaries fixed toward the north.
Page 468
468 TERRITORIAL PAPERS In consequence of these two resolutions, Manassé Cutler and Win- throp Sergent entered on the 27th of October of the same year into negotiations with the counsel of the Treasury of the United States in order to acquire a part of this land, in the name of the Ohio Company— and as to the other part of the land, which was subject to the right of preemption, they entered into negotiations on the same day with the counsel of the treasury for their own account. On the 29th of the same month of October, 1787, Cuttler and Ser- gent and their associates, on the one side, and Wm. Duer and his associates on the other side, concluded an association contract, re- ceived by Jean Wilkes, notary public of New York. By this contract, Cuttler and Sergent grant and convey to Duer their rights and claims, in equal parts, to the above-mentioned land, and establish an equal and inseparable right in the dispositions which might be made of this land both in Europe and America. They authorize Wm. Duer to mortgage or sell the said land in Holland or in such other part of Europe as he may consider proper and to send an agent to Europe for this purpose to carry on the said negotiation in accordance with the instructions that he would receive from him, it being well understood, however, that Wm. Duer would communicate from time to time, or when he might be requested to do so by Cuttler and Sergent, the prog- ress of the negotiation. X Duer obligates himself to advance the sum of one hundred thousand dollars—X and to that extent it is stipulated that the benefit of the preference for this land depends on the exact payment on the part of the Ohio Company of half of the purchase price of the land for which it has contracted X. Pursuant to this contract, Duer sent Joel Barlow to France in the capacity of agent, giving him authority in the name of the Scioto Company to sell or mortgage for any sum which he might deem proper, such part or parts of the said land as he might deem proper, and obligating himself in the name of his company, and under the powers given him, to ratify all the contracts which the said Barlow might conclude with any entity or private individual whatsoever. In the exercise of these powers, Barlow made a sale in France to a company organized under the name of the Scioto Company, by a contract concluded in the presence of Rameau, a notary at Paris, on the 3d of August, 1789. That company appointed as its agents Wm. Playfair and Chaiss(?) de Soissons who, conjointly with Barlow, sold in separate lots portions of the above-mentioned land to a great num- ber of French private individuals at the end of the year 1789 and at the beginning of 1790. During the latter year, Barlow sold to another French company the portions of this land which had not been sold by the former, and the latter company sold on the spot various portions of this land to several private individuals.
Page 469
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 469 In the description of the land which had been communicated to various French purchasers, the land of the Scioto Company was con- sidered as extending from the river of that name along the Ohio to the mouth of the Great Kanawha. On their arrival in America, the French were received by W. Duer in the capacity of controller of the Scioto Company. He treated with them in that capacity, and pend- ing the time when the preparations and surveys necessary for distribu- tion among them of the land which they had purchased could be made, he gave to each of them two city lots and one lot of four acres on the Gallipolis land—and that is all the land of which they have had the enjoyment since their arrival in America. I say the enjoyment be- cause, although that land was supposed to be included in the right of preemption of the Scioto Company, it actually belonged to the Ohio Company, with which the former had treated at the time of the arrival of the French—but the conditions of the treaty not having been fulfilled by the former, the latter claimed its rights. The Gallipolis land cleared does not as yet include more than four or five hundred acres, and I have reason to believe that five or six thou- sand acres around that settlement, might satisfy the inhabitants established there at present, without annulling the rights which they have to the land which they have purchased in France from the Scioto Company. STATEMENT OF ELIAS BOUDINOT: THE INHABITANTS OF GALLIPOLIS [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:ADS] [1793 c] The Facts that I have referred to, with regard to the Galliopolis Tract of Land are. When the Scioto Company discovered the rise of Certificates where- by the profit of carrying their purchase into Execution became doubt- full, they agreed with the Ohio Company for 100,000 Acres of Land, Off the West End of their Tract, on which they might seat the French People, with whom they had Contracted for a smaller Quantity, mak- ing them beleive that was the Land sold to them— I have seen the Agreement, between the Agents for the Ohio Com- pany & the Agents for the Scioto Company, I think Mess. Duer, Craige & Fowler.—I am greatly mistaken, if in this Agreement there were not express words of Conveyance by which all the right of the Ohio Company passed to the Grantees—I well remember that I gave my Opinion that there could remain no doubt, considering the Claim of the Ohio Company, but as an Equitable Right, they having no Deed—On this principle it was that I was Careful that our late law, authorizing the Presid to patent the Lands, should be to the Company & their associates & assigns or something to this purpose
Page 470
470 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Agents for the Scioto Co. were then, I conceive, vested with the Equitable Right to these Lands, when they settled the French People at Galliopolis— Since the last Session, by some agreement between the Agents for the Ohio Co. & Mr Duer & they have destroyed the Agreement as I am informed, and now the Ohio Co. Claims the Land, as having never been sold, alledging that the Sciota Co. never paid for it—The Argu- ment that the Settlers on the Ohio Co.'s Tract were a Barrier agl the Indians was frequently made use of to urge Congress to give that Co. the 100000 Acres of Land, to be divided among Settlers— Elias Boudinot [Endorsed] L. 1" Sess: 3d Con: Concerning Galliopolis people ESTIMATE OF SETTLERS NORTH OF THE OHIO [MHS: Pickering Papers :C] [1793] Estimate by M* Heckenwelder of the Settlers North of the Ohio. At the mouth of Muskingum & the mouth of Wolf Creek, about 350. 350 souls—besides the garrison. 80. At Belle Pre (12 or 15 miles below) 70 or 80 souls. At Gallipolis (about 3K miles below the mouth of the Great 300. Kenhawa) about 300 souls, besides a garrison of 40 soldiers. At Baker's station, about 30 miles above Limestone, at least 50. 50 souls. 1100. At Columbia (the mouth of the Little Miami) 1100 souls. At Cincinnati (5 miles below Fort Washington) 900 souls— 900. besides the army 30. At South Bend, 7% miles lower, about 30 souls. At North Bend (Judge Symmes's place) 7K miles below the 250. South Bend) about 250 souls At Fort Steuben (the Ohio Rapids) 60 soldiers. 40. At Clarksville (3 miles below fort Steuben) about 40 souls. At Freeman's, Dunlap's, and another station, back of Colum- 50. bia & Cincinnati, about 50 souls Settlers at several stations between Pittsburg & Muskingum, 70. about 70 souls. 3220. Shawanese [Endorsed] Mr Heckenwelder's Estimate of the numbers of Inhab- itants on the north side of the Ohio. Total 3220—besides the troops.
Page 471
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 471 SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [ M HS: Sargent Papers: ALS] Philadelphia Jany 2d 1794 Sir In Consequence of your Queries relative to the Absence of Govenour Sl Clair from the Territory northwest of the Ohio—causes thereof &c* I have made a reference to the Record of Proceedings of the Executive Department of that Government (now in the Office of the Secretary of State) and it appears that his first Absence was from the 24th of January 1789 to the 24th of December of the same year—this took place immediately after the Treaty of Fort Harmar, and probably to report the same to the general Government. Upon the 11th of June 1790,78 having formally relinquished to me his powers and Duties, He again left the Territory to attend the general Government—at this time the Disposition of the Savages was hostile and the Expedition which afterwards took place under General Harmar was meditated; He was absent to the 16th of Septem- ber of the same year, And upon the succeeding December (about the 20th) and soon after the Event of the said Expedition He again visited the general Government and upon the 29th of April 1791 returned to the Territory in Command of the Army— Upon the 1" of may his military Duties called him to Kentuckey and the Government was with the Secretary to the 8th of June following— From the 18th to the 29th of August, and from the 31" of August to the 12th of September the Governour again in Kentuckey. Upon the 8th of December in the same year, and very soon after the Defeat of the Army under his Command He quitted the Govern- ment and was absent to the 2d of August 1793 79—probably in attending to the Investigation, directed, of the Causes of Failure of his Expedition— Antecedent to this Sir, and to the Law authorising the Secretary of the western Territory to discharge the Duties of the Governour, bearing Date August 7th 1789,80 I was involved in some Expenses not incident to my Office, from the Circumstance of preceeding Him to the western Country and continuing resident from April 1788 to July, in his Absence. "See St. Clair's instructions to Sargent, June 10, 1790, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 311. "Compare the foregoing statements with the corresponding periods in the Journal Exec. Procs. See also Sargent to the President, Dec. 30, 1793, ante, p. 463; report of the Secretary of the Treasury to the House of Representatives, Jan. 31, 1794, post, p. 473; memorandum of absences of Governor St. Clair, 1798, n. d., post, p. 647. "Ante, p. 203.
Page 472
472 TERRITORIAL PAPERS It is proper I should observe Sir that my Duties as Scribe for indian Business which necessarily engaged very much attention to the 11th of June 1790 were then considerably lessened by the Obstacles to a friendly Intercourse with the Indians—And that for the furnishing Copies of the Territorial Laws to the several Counties (which was one of the Objects of my petition to Congress) a provision has been made by our Legislature since June 179181— with great Respect I have the honour to be Sir your obedt Humble servant Winthrop Sargent Honble Secretary of the Treasury [Endorsed] Letter to the Secretary of the Treasury Jan 2s 1794 N°5 SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:C] Philadelphia 3d of Jany 1794 The Secretary of the Territory of the United States North west of the river Ohio begs leave to represent to the Honourable the Secretary of State that considerable inconveniences accrue to the inhabitants of Vincennes upon the Oubache river by a delay of the Patents for the Donation lands to the ancient settlers thereof.82 Some doubts in the mind of the Governour whether those Patents are to be issued by the general government or himself, is the cause of this delay—And the opinion of the Secretary of State is requested thereupon.83— He is also respectfully requested to permit the printing of the Laws passed in the Northwest Territory at the Session of the Legislature of 1792 to be effected as early as may be convenient, it being very essential to the welfare of the said Territory. The Honourable Secretary of State. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Philadelphia January 4.1794. Sir I have examined the journal of the proceedings of the execu- tive in the territory North West of the Ohio. It is very little more, than a history of bickerings and discontents, which do not require the « By an act passed June 22, 1791, creating the office of clerk of the Legislature (Pease, ed., Laws Northwest Terr., IHC, xvII, 43-44). 83 According to the act of Mar. 3, 1791, ante, p. 340. a See the Secretary of State to the Attorney General, Feb. 7,1794, post, p. 474.
Page 473
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 473 attention of the President. I shall therefore forbear to send it to you, unless you should call for it. The laws of that territory are now under transcription, that they may be forwarded to Congress. It was for some time doubted, whether they were to be laid before that body, without a special order for that purpose. But the doubt is now removed, by a conversation with Col° Sargent. I have the honor, sir, to be with the highest respect yr mo. ob. serT Edm: Randolph. The President of the U. S. [Endorsed] From The Secy of State 4 Jan: 1794. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD:Dom. Letters, vi:C] [January 21, 1794] The Secretary of State has the honor of informing the President, that he has caused two copies to be made of the laws of the north western territory, and now incloses them. It was long doubted, whether it was the duty of the Executive to lay them before congress. But upon a closer examination of the ordinance, the propriety of the step flows from the right, reserved to congress, to disapprove these laws. For how are Congress to get official possession of them, but by an official communication from the Executive files, among which they are lodged? The form of a message is not sent; because it is appre- hended, that the President may choose to connect these laws with some other information, and one message may cover both.84 January 21" 1794. __ REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY: SARGENT'S MEMORIAL [MHS: Sargent Papers: C M] [January 31, 1794] The Secretary of the Treasury to whom was referred by the house of representatives the memorial of Winthrop Sargent Secretary of the Territory Northwest of the Ohio86 respectfully reports thereupon as follows 84 Message submitted Jan. 21, 1794 (Richardson, ed., Messages and Papers, I, 150). The following year the House of Representatives passed a joint resolu- tion annulling the laws passed in the territory in 1792, with one exception, but the Senate refused to concur (Annals, 3 Cong., 1 and 2 sess., House, 601,1214, 1223, 1227; Senate, 37, 84, 823, 830). The report of the House committee, May 24, 1794, is in A.S.P., Misc., I, 82. Cf. ordinance of July 13, 1787, ante, p. 43. M Printed also in A.S.P., Claims, I, 74. M [December], 1790, ante, p. 318. See Sargent to the Secretary of War, July 6, 1792, ante, p. 404, to the President, Dec. 30, 1793, ante, p. 463, and to the Secre- tary of the Treasury, Jan. 2,1794, ante, p. 471; report of House committee, Feb. 13, 1794, post, p. 475; statement of Sargent May, 1794, post, p. 480.
Page 474
474 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The second Section of the Act to provide for the Government of the Territory Northwest of the Ohio authorises and requires the Secretary thereof in Case of the Death removal resignation or necessary absence of the Governour of the said Territory to execute all the powers and perform all the Duties of the Governour during the vacancy or Absence— It appears as detailed in a paper under the Signature of the memo- rialist that in Consequence of Absences of the Governour (partly occasioned by Calls of public Duty elsewhere, partly by ill health) the memorialist has had to perform the Duties of Governour pursuant to the above mentioned Section for a more considerable portion of the Time since his Appointment than was probably contemplated in fixing the Salary of his Office— The memorialist suggests his having had to sustain during this Time considerably greater Expenses than would have attended him had he not had to act as the Substitute for the Governour—though he exhibits no Statement of the additional Expense— It is naturally to be inferred that his Suggestion must be well founded, and that as well in reference to the additional Service which must have been thrown upon the memorialist as to the additional Expense to which he was subjected the Salary of seven hundred and fifty Dollars annexed by Law to the Office he holds must have been under the Circumstances of the Case an inadequate Compensation— It is for the Wisdom of the Legislature to decide how far these equi- table Considerations may justify or demand a retrospective allowance in addition to that Compensation— The Secretary forbears to give an opinion (doubting whether it would be within the Intent of the reference to him) whether the Salary itself independent of particular Circumstances, be an adequate Compensation for an Officer whom the Law charges occasionally with the important Trust of acting in the Capacity of Governour All which is respectfully submitted 87 Jany 31" 1794 [Endorsed] N° 2 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL [SD:Dom. Letters, vi:C] [February 7, 1794] The Attorney General of the U. S. The Secretary of State begs the favor of the attorney-general of the United States, to give his opinion upon the inclosed extract from a "Received Feb. 3, 1794 {Annals, 3 Cong., 1 sess., 417).
Page 475
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 475 note of the Secretary of the territory of the United States, north-west of the river Ohio.88 PHILADEL' February 7th 1794. "Philadelphia, 3d of January 1794. "The Secretary of the territory of the United States north-west of the river Ohio begs leave to represent to the honorable the Secretary of State that considerable inconveniencies accrue to the Inhabitants of Vincennes upon the Oubashe River by a delay of the patents for the donation Lands to the ancient Settlers thereof. "Some doubts in the mind of the Governor whether those patents are to be issued by the general government or himself is the cause of this delay—And the opinion of the Secretary of State is requested thereupon." REPORT OF COMMITTEE: SARGENT'S MEMORIAL [MHS: Sargent Papers :C] [February 13, 1794] The Committee to whom was refered the Report of the Secretary of the Treasury89 on the memorial of Winthrop Sargent Secretary of the Territory of the United States north west of the river Ohio90 Report as followeth91 That it appears to your Committee that the said memorialist did execute the several Duties of Governour of the said Territory as stated in the report of the Secretary of the Treasury in the Absence of the Governour, who was most of that Time employed as Commander in Chief of the Army, on the Expedition against the Indians. Your Committee conceive, that the said memorialist, in the Dis- charge of such Duties, in the absence of the Governour, did no more than was contemplated by the second second Section of the Act providing for the Government of the Territory Northwest of the river Ohio. Your Committee also report, that from the official Statements of the Secretary of the Treasury, of the Expenditures of the civil List, laid before the house, that Arthur Sl Clair, the Governour of the said Territory has received his full Salary, for the years 1791 and 1792— Your Committee also report that it appears by a Certificate of Joseph Howell accountant to the War Department, that the said Arthur St Clair has received his full pay, Subsistance and Forage, from the fourth of march 1791 to the 6th of April 1792 as major General of the late Army against the Indians. 88 Jan. 3, 1794, ante, p. 472. See report of the Attorney General, Mar. 25. 1794, post, p. 477. » Jan. 31, 1794, ante, p. 473. » [December], 1790, ante, p. 318. •l Annals, 3 Cong., 1 sess., 417, 452.
Page 476
476 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The Committee upon the whole on a full and mature Consideration of the memorial and report of the Secretary of the Treasury thereupon are of Opinion that a second Salary of Governour ought not to be allowed—The first Salary of Governour having been already received by Arthur Sl Clair the present Governour for the years 1791 and 1792. The Committee further report that the Secretary of the Government of the Territory Northwest of the river Ohio ought to receive the pay of the Governour when discharging the Duties of that Office, and that a Bill be brought in for that purpose regulating the same in future.92 [Endorsed] N° 3 Report of a Committee to whom was refered the report of the Secretary of the Treasury upon the memorial of W Sargent THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: AL] [February 15, 1794] The Secretary of State has the honor of laying before the President the copy of a proclamation,93 put into his hands by Govr Sl Clair for that purpose. Saturday. [Addressed] The President of the U. S. [Endorsed] From The Secy of State 15. Feby 1794 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [SD: Dom. Letters, VI: C] [March 19, 1794] The Secretary of War— The Secretary of State has the honor of returning to the Secretary of War the instructions, prepared for General Wayne, as sole negotia- tor with the Indians94— It is presumed from the shape, which the instructions have taken, that the President has determined to appoint General Wayne to that Office. Otherwise reasons would now be offered, why such a nomina- tion ought not to take place. Was it not understood, that the instructions were to wait, until General Wayne should be heard from again? This is wished for the purpose of farther deliberation on the subject; tho' the instructions appear from a hasty reading to be intitled in general to approbation. If they cannot wait E. Randolph will call at the War-Office, and note some particulars to General Knox— March 19th 1794. n Cf. statement of Sargent, May, 1794, post, p. 480. •» Dec. 8, 1793, ante, p. 460. M Not found. One article of the instructions is printed in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 470.
Page 477
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 477 THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD: Letters Atty. Gen., 1792-1810: ALS ••] Mar. 25th 1794 Sir In answer to your enquiry, Whether the President of the United States or the Governor of the Western Territory ought to issue patents for the Lands granted to the inhabitants of Vincennes upon the Oubashe river,86 I have now the honor to state to you my opinion. It appears that Congress by their resolve of the 20th June 1788 97 directed that three tracts of Land should be laid out in the form of parallelograms for the benefit of those inhabitants, which were to be distributed amongst them by lot in the proportion of 400 acres for each family & immediate possession given: but no title could be acquired untill they had resided thereon three years from the time of such distribution. By the act of 3. March 179198 The Governor of the Western Ter- ritory is directed to lay out three tracts of Land agreeably to the said act of 20h June 1788: but he is not authorised to make any conveyances or patents to the settlers for their respective allotments. It is remarkable that he is empower'd to carry the first part of the said resolve into complete effect & to confirm the title of the settlers to other lands claimed by them; and also to make grants of Land not exceeding 100* to certain settlers who had not obtained any donation Land under the former acts. The opinion of Congress may therefore be inferred that the Governor of the Western Territory is the proper officer to issue the patents, or grants, in question: but if that was their opinion they have not expressed it: nor are the words of the act broad enough to implicate any such power. I am also of opinion that there is nothing in the Constitution or laws that invests the President with authority to issue patents to these settlers. If therefore patents are thought necessary to confirm the titles which the individuals have acquired by allotment & residence, agree- ably to the provision of the resolve of the 20 June 1788—it remains with Congress to direct by whom they shall be issued.99 I have the honor to be with great Esteem Sir Your most Obedt SeJ7* „ W. Bradford Secretary of State [Endorsed] Bradford W. March 25. 94. recd March 31. 94 "Printed also in Hall (ed.), Opinions AOs. Gen., 44-45; an unreliable printing. There is a contemporary manuscript copy in the Senate files, 3 Cong., 1 i "Feb. 7, 1794, ante, p. 474. "Ante, pp. 113 et seq. "Ante, p. 339. "Cf. further statement, Apr. 29, 1794, post, p. 478.
Page 478
478 TERRITORIAL PAPERS SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SF:3 Cong., 1 sess.:C] Philadelphia April 19th 1794. Sir—I observe in the report of the United States Attorney upon the subject of Donation Lands in the Western Territory that he has taken up the Business in a view only of the people upon the Mississipi and passed over those of the Oubashe who seem unconditionally to be entitled to Patents for their several proportions, as the same has long since been allotted to them agreeably to order of Congress. The Attorney General is of opinion the Governor should grant those Patents, and that such was probably the intention of Congress, but that no power for this purpose has been delegated to him.—nor is the President of the United States authorised so to do.*—If Sir, Congress shall not take this subject into consideration during the present Session very many of the Citizens in the Government North west of the Ohio must suffer injury by the delay. I take leave Sir to request the answer of the President to the Petition of Mr Freeman for the Life of his Son,1 And have the honour to be with every sentiment of respect Your most Obedient, _T Winthrop Sargent. Hon1"" Mr Randolph THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Lettere Atty. Gen., 1792-1810: ALS2] April 29. 1794. Sir, I perceive by the letter of the Secretary of the Western Terri- tority that the settlers who are desirous of obtaining patents for their donation Lands, are not those referred to in my Letter of the [25 March,] but such as are intitled, & have had them laid out under the resolve of Congress of the 29th Augt 1787 [1788]. These persons, however, are in the same situation as the former so far as relates to a confirmation of their rights by patent: there being no authority for granting patents to them, vested, either in the President or in the Governor of the Western Territory. I have the honor to be with great Esteem sir Your most Obedt SerT Secretary of State Wm Bradford. [Addressed] Secretary of State [Endorsed] Bradford W 29 Apl. 1794 * a similar subject is now before Congress in cases of lands granted to Virginia officers lying between the Scioto & Miami rivers & which have been surveyed to them but no Patents or Certificates thereof given, & the same will probably be soon decided on. [Footnote on the MS.] 1 Petition of Abraham Freeman for pardon of his son, Dr. Clarkson Freeman, Sept. 5, 1793 (SD, Appt. Office Files). 2 Printed also in Hall (ed.), Opinions AUs. Gen., p. 45; the text is unreliable.
Page 479
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 479 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO SECRETARY SARGENT [SD:Dom. Letters, VI :C] Philadelphia, April 30th 1794. Winthrop Sargent Esq" Sir I do myself the honor of inclosing to you a copy of the Attor- ney-General's letter, explanatory of his opinion, respecting patents for donation-lands; and I beg leave to add, that the President of the United States does not think proper, under the circumstances of the case, to give any further order concerning the pardon of Freeman.4 I am, Sir, yo. mo. ob. serv. Edm: Randolph. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD-Corr., 1794-1796 :C] Thursday morn11 15. May [1794] The Secretary of State begs the favor of the President to cast his eye over the inclosed draft of a Letter, intended for Govr Sl Clair, & Mr Sargeant respectively; & to signify his pleasure thereon. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR AND SECRETARY SARGENT [SD:Dom. Letters, vi :C] Philadelphia, May 15th 1794. The Governor of the North-western Territory. Sir/ It is not without regret, that the President of the United States finds himself compelled to express to you, through me, his dissatisfaction at your long absence from the exercise of your functions in the government North-west of the Ohio. He has on all occasions wished to indulge public Officers with reasonable intermissions from duty; and he would be extremely unwilling to produce unnecessarily any private inconvenience to their affairs. But, being sworn to see the Laws executed, and resolved to prevent those criticisms, which must inevitably be made, upon his supposed sanction to lengthy and perhaps injurious suspensions of public service, he has instructed me to urge your return to the discharge of your office— I have the honor to be, with sentiments of respect, Sir, Yo. mo. ob. serv.— Edm: Randolph. The same to Winthrop Sargent Esq" Secretary of the North- western territory— 4 Cf. letter of Apr. 19, 1794, ante, p. 478.
Page 480
480 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The two Letters immediately preceding were not sent, being super- seded by an interview; which produced an explanation to the Presi- dent in writing; upon which he has since said nothing more to the Secretary of State— STATEMENT OF SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [MHS:Sargent Papers: ADS] [May, 1794] Statement of Mr Sargent's Business before Congress upon the 20lh of May—from the Commencement. In the year 1787 Congress appointed Mr Sargent the Secretary of their Western Territory constituting it his Duty to preserve the Laws that should be adopted and made—to record the Proceedings of the Governour, and to transmit to them Copies of the same, Ordering him as a salary therefor seven hundred & fifty Dollars per Annum— In the August of 1789 they directed that in addition to the Duties then incumbent upon him he should perform all those of the Gover- nour during any of his Absences,5 thereby very much accumulating his Services and Expences which in 1790 (and by the first opportunity that presented) He stated in a Letter to the President of the United States, requesting that due Provision might be made therefor,6 and near the close of the same year obtained permission to come on to Philadelphia to urge in person this Suit—which was then no ways advanced—not because "the President did not deem the same reasonable" (as the Secretary of State informed Mr Sargent) "but because it was improper that any pecuniary Concerns should originate with him"—and further, "that means would have been devised in the Case of his Absence to have brought forward this Business but being here he had better take measures for that purpose himself "—which was accordingly done in a memorial presented to the house of repre- sentatives in the Decr of 1790 7—and then referred to the Secretary of the Treasury.8 Upon the 1" of Feby 1791 some of the settlements upon the Ohio having been attacked by the Indians, and the Presidents Pleasure for his Departure signified, he then again repaired to the western Terri- tory as a Substitute for the Governour. The Secretary of the Treas- ury had not at this Time reported upon his memorial, but he be- lieved however that he would soon have done it, and favourably— and he had assurances from Gentlemen of Congress that ample Com- • Aug. 7, 1789, ante, p. 203. • Aug. 1, 1790, ante, p. 295. » Ante, p. 318. » AnnaU, 3 Cong., 1 sess., 417.
Page 481
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 481 pensation would be made him for all additional services—In full faith of this he has made his Calculations, and actually accommodated his Disbursements to the Salary of two thousand Dollars allowed the Governour—presuming he would be entitled to receive the same whilst he was discharging all his as well as the Secretary's Duties— The delay in adjustment of this Business subjects Mr S—in the present moment to very considerable Embarrassments. For more than three years has he been in a State of Suspense - Although no Exertion on his part was wanting, a report could not be obtained upon his memorial until the middle of the present session, and in a great proportion of the Time he has peen involved in the accumulated Services and Expenses of Governour and Secretary upon the pay of the Secretary only. Mr Hamiltons Report has been favourable,9 & the house of repre- sentatives have thought proper to commit the same to Mess" Heth, Montgommery and Foster Who report That the Secretary of the Territory Northwest of the Ohio ought to receive the pay of the Governour when discharging his Duties—and that a Bill be brought in to provide for the same in future—but that the Governour having received the pay for part time, no Compensation can be made to the Secretary—10 This Opinion however may be combatted by Gentlemen who believe that the Secretary has performed Services uncompensated— The Difference between Secretary and Governours pay whilst Mr Sargent has actually been discharging the Duties of both offices will exceed three Thousand Dollars—a sum very important to a man of small Fortunes, and rendered much more so by the Expenses of two Journies from the western Country and a long attendance at the seat of Government, But he trusts that all this will be duly considered and equitably provided for when the report shall be called up— Winthrop Sargent Philadelphia May—1794 Secretary of State— THE POSTMASTER GENERAL" TO MAJOR ISAAC CRAIG [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. C] Gen1 P Office May 24 1794 Major Isaac Craig Pittsburg Sir By the last Mail I requested You to provide three suitable boats, each to be managed by five hands including the Boatmaster to • Jan. 31, 1794, ante, p. 473. 10 Feb. 13, 1794, ante, p. 475. "Timothy Pickering. 128850—34 32
Page 482
482 TERRITORIAL PAPERS carry the mail on the Ohio between Wheeling and Limestone. I have been asked, whether such batteaux, as are used on the Mohawk river (the bottoms quite flat) would not be most suitable for the Ohio. I pretend not to determine, boats, that will be pushed with the most Ease and Swiftness and which at the same time will draw very little water, must doubtless be the most suitable. I leave this to Your Discretion. As some doubts are entertained of the practicability of carrying the Mail by the Ohio with due Regularity and Dispatch, it will be proper to have the first arrangements temporary. For which reason I request You to engage the boatmen on the Condition, that they may be discharged upon one or two months Notice, in case this mode of carrying a mail to Kentuckey & the Army should not answer the public Expectation concerning it and thence I should be induced to abandon it. I hope to hear from You by the next Mail. A packet or packets franked by me will go in this day's mail, which I pray you to forward as directed. Perhaps General Scott will not have left Pittsburg, when this arrives. In which case he would take charge of them. The one for Fort Washington You will forward by him also, or by any other Conveyance, which You shall judge more direct or certain. I am &° T. P. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JUDGE PUTNAM [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. C] General Post Office Phil» May 24, 1794 General Rufus Putnam Marietta Sir It is proposed to attempt the carriage of a mail from Pitts- burg to Wheeling by land, and thence by water to Limestone. From Limestone by a new road on the Southern side of the Ohio to the mouth of Licking, opposite to Fort Washington, where it will cross over. From Limestone the mail will be carried thro' the State of Kentucky: the post road thro' the Wilderness, in this case to be discon- tinued. I have given directions to have three boats constructed for the purpose, to be formed in the best manner for ease and expedition, in pushing up stream, to be managed by five hands each. I hope they will be running some time in June. Marietta will be a station for the boats to stop at as they pass; and doubtless it will be convenient to have a post office there. Herewith I send a packet addressed to you, to be put into the hands of the per- son you judge to be most suitable for postmaster. He will there see the forms in which the business] is to be transacted with which he should
Page 483
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 483 make himself acquainted. The law13 now sent will expire in a few days; it is substantially the same as the new law,14 as to the regulations. The latter will be forwarded when prepared. The person you desig- nate for Postmaster should be careful and trusty; and there will be an advantage in having one whose residence will be near the Landing place of the mail boats. The advantages of a regular mail will be so great to your settle- ment I am sure you will omit nothing to secure them." I am & T. P. P. S. I suppose a Postoffice may be eligible at Gallipolis,16 for which I send a second packet addressed to you to be disposed of as you think fit. You will be so good as to favor me with an answer as soon as possible THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JUDGE PUTNAM [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. C] General Post Office June 7.1794 General Rufus Putnam Sir I wrote you on the 24th ult°17 & sent two packages, for the establishment of post offices at Marietta and Gallipolis. Major Craig informs me that the mail boats which are preparing at Pittsburg will soon be ready. I supposed their crews would have been engaged there: but Major Craig writes me, that he had consulted Capt. Mills of Mari- etta who told him that he would procure at Marietta a trusty boatmas- ter and four good hands, for one boat to ply between that place and Gallipolis and that another set of excellent hands might be engaged at Gallipolis, for the boat which is to ply between that place and Lime- stone. It does not appear that Major Craig has given any direction for raising this third set: if he has he will inform you; and on defect of such information, permit me to ask of you the favour to take such steps as you shall effectual & best to engage this third boats crew, expeditiously. Be pleased to speak with Capt. Mills on the subject and to advise Major Craig at what time both setts will be ready.— Perhaps they may be so engaged that their pay need not begin till near the time when their actual service will commence.—Col° O Hara18 & Major Craig both informed me that hands could be engaged at 12 1» May 2, 1792, 1 STaT. 232-239. m May 8, 1794, 1 Stat. 354-366. "Answered June 9, 1794 Buell, ed., Memoirs Putnam, pp. 388-390. 18 See the Postmaster General to the Postmaster at Gallipolis, June 20, 1794, post, p. 485. 17 Supra. 18 James O'Hara, Quartermaster General, U. S. Army, 1792-1796 (Heitman, comp., Hist. Reg. U. S. Army, l, 757).
Page 484
484 TERRITORIAL PAPERS dollars a month and rations at 15 cents each now they think that good hands cannot be obtained under 15, nor boat-masters under 20.— The difference of 3 dollars a month will increase considerably the expence of the undertaking which without such addition will be very great. However it must now be encountered if unavoidable19 I am &c T. P. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO GEORGE MITCHELL20 [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. C] General Post Office Phil* June 20.1794 George Mitchell Esqr Sir I wrote you on the 24th of May, & 14th instant21 relative to the establishment of the mail by the way of the Ohio. It was then my intention & expectation to provide for the carriage of the mail in your state, by contract. But until an experiment has been made by the Ohio, I cannot obtain the requisite facts. I have therefore con- cluded for the present, to hire riders, on the best terms which can be obtained, for the residue of the roads in your state, as well as from Limestone to Fort Washington, for which I have already requested you to make provision. I wrote lately to Gen1 Barbee, the postmaster at Danville, praying him to hire riders accordingly. Major Craig at Pittsburg writes me that the mail boats are prepared. This I expect will go to you in the first to be followed by the others regularly, once a week. As soon as this first mail arrives at Limestone, I request you to forward the inclosed letter to General Barbee, by the first conveyance which shall present; and he will then set riders in motion, to attend your office weekly. Having advised the Secretary of War of this establishment, I expect some dispatches will come to his office. Other dispatches will doubt- less go from Pittsburg & other places. As soon as they arrive at Lime- stone, I pray you to send them to Fort Washington & to provide, as I formerly requested, for a regular weekly conveyance to and from that place. The uniform practice in the department requires that each deputy give bond with sureties for the performance of the duties of the office, and take and subscribe the Oaths prescribed by law. The bond and oaths for you are now inclosed, in which be pleased to fill up the blanks. I have presumed on your accepting the post-office at Limestone and I hope nothing will occur to prevent it. However lest it should be "See the Postmaster General to Putnam, June 20,1794, post, p. 486; the same, Aug. 8, 1794, and Jan. 16, 1795, and Putnam to the Postmaster General, Aug. 30, 1794, Feb. 9 and 20, 1795, in Buell (ed.), op. cit. pp. 390-402. 20 Postmaster at Limestone. 21 These letters have not been seen.
Page 485
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 485 otherwise, I add to my requests this one, that you will place the papers in the hands of some other fit person, that the business now ripe for execution may not be interrupted or delayed. A key to unlock the mail is inclosed. It is to have this security as soon as the requisit provision of saddle bags or portmanteaus shall be made.22 I am & T. P. P. S. I shall be much obliged by your writing to Gen1 Barbee, to inform him on what day weekly the mails may be expected at Lime- stone, from Pittsburg & when the first mail arrives. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO FRANCIS DE HEBECOURT [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. C] Gen1 Post Office Phil* June 20, 1794 The Postmaster at Gallipolis Sir Having no knowledge of any persons at Gallipolis, I sent to General Putnam at Marietta certain papers relative to the establish- ment of a post office at the former place, as well as at Marietta. This letter I transmit to him, that he may give the proper direction. Inclosed is a key to unlock the mail, and a bond to be executed as usual with sureties, and the forms, of the oaths to be taken by the person accepting the Post-Office. When the bond and oaths are returned, a commission will be sent you In the mean time the busi- ness may commence, as soon as the bond is executed and the oaths taken and subscribed. Three boats are engaged, to ply between Wheeling and Limestone, in three stages—one from Wheeling to Marietta—one thence to Gallipolis—and the third thence to Limestone—whence the mail will be sent by land to Fort Washington. By this arrangement, a mail will be passing up and down the Ohio every week. This at least is the plan; and from the information given me, I have room to expect it will succeed. The law included in the package destined for your office, and the tables of rates, will enable you to mark the proper postage on the letters going from your office. The distances on the river, you must take according to the best estimation you can obtain 23 I wish for an answer by the first opportunity; and am &c T. P. M See the Postmaster General to Putnam. June 7, 1794, ante, p. 483. » Cf. the Postmaster General to Craig, May 24, 1794, ante, p. 481.
Page 486
486 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JUDGE PUTNAM [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. C] General Post Office Phil1 June 20. 1794 Rufus Putnam Esqr Sir I wrote you on May 24th.2« & June 7th.2s relative to the carriage of a mail by the Ohio, and the Establishment of post-offices at Marietta and Gallipolis. Those letters I hope will have reached you, and the persons have been designated for postmasters at those places. To day I received advice from Major Craig that one boat and crew were ready, and that the other two would be ready to follow her weekly. At Limestone the mails by the Ohio are to be sent by land to Fort Washington. George Mitchell Esqr was named to me for postmaster at Limestone, and I desired him to make provision for carrying the mail thence to Fort Washington. I inclose herein a key for the postmaster at Marietta, for the lock which will secure the mail; and a packet for the postmaster at Galli- polis, also inclosing a key; to which I request you to give the proper direction. The persons accepting the offices must give bond with sureties, and take the oaths prescribed by law. These are now forwarded, for both places.28 I hope shortly to have the pleasure of an answer; and remain your & T. P. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :LS] War department June 25, 1794 Snt, Last evening I received a letter from Major General Wayne dated the 26th of May,27 and from the Deputy Quarter Master General at Fort Washington dated the 31" of the same month.28 I enclose a copy of the General's letter. General Scott would probably arrive at Fort Washington about the 6th instant, his instructions therefore would not militate with Wayne's arrangements as the latter in a letter to Govr Shelby says that General Scott would expect to command. On the 13th of May some Savages attacked an escort carrying Pro- visions from Fort Washington to Fort Hamilton killed five out of six "Ante, p. 482. »» Ante, p. 483. 28 See the Postmaster General to Craig, May 24, 1794, ante, p. 481. 27 Washington Papers (LC). 29 Not found.
Page 487
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 487 of the advanced Guard but were repulsed with the loss of one killed and six rifles taken, but they carried off some horses, so says Wilkinson. I have also another private letter from General Wilkinson in which he says on the subject of provisions "The strife between the Contractors and the General appears to increase, but our provisions increase also, and I think all difficulty on this head must soon cease, as a competition in the purchase of Beef Cattle, has taken place between them, which must soon secure a sufficient stock." w The other parts of the letter complain of the detachment at Fort Massac as not being sufficient. That General Wayne had suspected that he, Wilkinson, had been the cause of the defaults of the Con- tractors.30 I myself am pretty well convinced that the contractors will not fail for want of flour, as by the enclosed letter from Mr Williams it appears that they must have at Fort Washington and advanced of it, one Year's supply for five thousand Men—but the transport may be doubted, General Wayne's intelligence of Simcoe's being at the Miami rapids is drawn from a distant source, to wit, some reports at Cahokia on the Mississippi May the 6th and therefore not to be depended on. He appears to know nothing immediately from the rapids. I have received a letter from General Chapin dated the 12th Instant,31 a copy of which is enclosed. The narrative mentioned is not material excepting as to the dissatisfaction excited among the six nations by the Presq'ue Isle business32 and the confirmation of the british erecting a post at the Miami with the idea of its being an indian fortification. I have the honor to be Sir, with perfect respect Your obedient Servant H Knox The President of the United States [Endorsed] From The Secrety of War 25th June 1794 29 See O'Hara to Wayne, Apr. 3, July 26, and Oct. 16, 1794; Wayne to Elliot and Williams, contractors, Oct. 17, 1794, and to O'Hara, Feb. 8, 1795, Darlington (ed.), Fort Pitt, pp. 260-261, 264-265, 268-272, 290-292. » See Sargent to the Secretary of War, June 23, 1794, Knox Papers (MHS). 51 Extract printed in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 519. For relevant papers touching the council with the Six Nations at Buffalo Creek, February, 1794, see ibid., pp. 477-482. "For the Presq' Isle affair, see ibid., pp. 503-520; Pa. Archs., 2 ser., VI, 627-832. The latter is very complete.
Page 488
488 TERRITORIAL PAPERS JONATHAN DAYTON TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [LC: Hamilton Papers: ALS] Elizabeth town June 26th 1794 Dear Sir, Judge Symmes, who left this place yesterday for Phila- delphia by the way of Morristown, requested me to acquaint you that in two or three days he should be at your office to obtain the Deed for the Miami lands.33 The delay of this business, on one account or another, has been so much beyond what was foreseen, as to occasion much uneasiness with many of the interested, & to induce me to urge it's completion with all possible dispatch. If you have leisure, be so good as to inform me what are your accounts from the Westward—whether Wayne is to be reinforced & directed to advance, and whether Simcoe or any of the British troops have actually taken post, as was reported, within our territory. With the highest regard Yours Jona: Dayton [Addressed] The Honble Alexander Hamilton Esqr Philadelphia [Endorsed] Eliz-Town June 26—94 J. Dayton Jona Dayton 26 June 1794 Free JONATHAN DAYTON TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [LC: Hamilton Papers: ALS] Elizabeth town August 9th 1794 Dr Sir, Will you be so obliging as to turn your attention immedi- ately to the subject of Judge Symmes's purchase between the Miamis, in order to have the different writings prepared for executing upon his arrival in Philadelphia, which will be in four or five days? The final completion of the business has been from one cause or another, so much protracted beyond what was foreseen or expected, that it has occasioned considerable uneasiness on the part of the concerned.34 With sentiments of perfect esteem I am Dr Sir Yours Jona: Dayton The Honble Colo: Hamilton. [Addressed] The Honble Alexander Hamilton Esqr Philadelphia Free [Endorsed] E-TownAug. 11—94 9 July 1794 Mr Dayton 33 Cf. act of May 5, 1792, ante, p. 394; papers relating to patent, Sept. 29-30, 1794, post, pp. 490 et seq. M See request of Symme3 for alteration of contract, Sept. 29,1794, post, p. 490.
Page 489
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 489 THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO MAJOR ISAAC CRAIG [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. C] General Post Office August 23.1794 Major Isaac Craig Pittsburg Sir I have been favoured with your letter of the 15th.35 covering the papers relative to the carriage of the mail by the Ohio, and the bonds of Major Finlay38 postmaster at Wheeling, whose commission I forward this day. I was apprehensive of the difficulty mentioned in the letter of Col° Mitchell, and regretted that the settlements on the Ohio would not admit of a more equal division of the distance among the three boats. I cannot think of going to the great expence of another boat.— Would there be any objection to the first boat's going to Bel Pre? I presume there is some settlement there. If there is any settlement about twenty miles below Gallipolis, the second boat might go thither, and then the third accomplish the voyage to Limestone. The most accurate account of distances I suppose is one furnished me by Col° Sargeant, formed on his own very careful observation. They here follow; Wheeling to Marietta .... 86 to Bel Pre lower end . . 19 . . 105 Bel Pre to Gallipolis .... 86 Little Guyandatta ... 18 .. 104 Little Guyandatta to Limestone 128 337 If the settlements on the Ohio will admit of the above division, or of any other which will more equally distribute the labour of the boats hands, than the present one, you are at full liberty to make it.—If any division than the present one is impracticable, I see no way of relieving Mr Dugan and his hands but by shifting the stations of all the boats, by regular tours.—I confess that I did not reckon, originally, on allowing much idle time to the boatmen, under an idea of resting: so much ease as was necessary I expected they would have when going down stream; and that, you may remember, we contemplated when making the arrangement. I intended to have sent the portmanteaus or saddle bags for the Kentucky mails from Philadelphia. This cannot now be done. I called at Mr Hodgson's store this morning to see the horsemen's portmanteaus, or valeeces. I think they will answer for the present. He supposes you have some in store. In this case I pray you to for- ward three to Col° Mitchell—one for the Fort-Washington route— one for the route to Danville—& the third for the route thence to Louisville. But before they are sent, they should be fixed with each M Not found. "John Finley; see Craig, Hist. Pittsburgh, p. 216.
Page 490
490 TERRITORIAL PAPERS a strap to reeve like the strap of a pair of saddle bags, with an iron rivetted at the end, & shaving a mortice in it to go over a staple, for the purpose of locking up the mail. The other end of the strap should be rivetted to the portmanteau, to render it secure. This little improvement I hope you will be able to make.—If you have no such portmanteaus, then I pray you to purchase three pair of large saddle bags and forward them to Col° Mitchell. The straps of them should be fixed as before mentioned, for the purpose of locking. I send herewith the lock for which the staples must be fitted, being much larger than the ordinary portmanteau locks. How is the mail secured when in the boats? I shall be much obliged by your information on this and every other matter concerning this business. As to the pay of the boatmen, if you can provide for it, and draw on me monthly for the amount, your draughts shall be paid at sight. So also as to the post-rider to Wheeling. Or if quarterly payments will answer, it would be more agreeable as occasioning less trouble to us both: but let it be made agreeable to the boatmen.37 I am &c T. P. REQUEST FOR ALTERATION OF PATENT TO JOHN CLEVES SYMMES [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1797-1806 :C] [September 29, 1794] Be it known unto all men by these Presents that whereas in pur- suance of certain resolutions of the United States in Congress assem- bled bearing date respectively the 23d & 27th days of July38 and the 23rd day of October 1787,39 or some of them a Contract was duly made & executed between Samuel Osgood, Walter Livingston & Arthur Lee Esq" Commissioners of the board of Treasury of the United States of the first part, Jonathan Dayton & Daniel Marsh Esq" of the second part, and John Cleves Symmes Esqr of the third part for the purchase & grant of a certain tract of Land in the Western Country adjoining the river Ohio, beginning on the bank of the same river at a spot exactly twenty miles distant along the several courses of the same from the place where the Great Miami empties itself into the said river Ohio from thence extending down the said River Ohio along the several courses thereof to the great Miami River thence up the said River Miami along the several courses thereof to a place whence a line drawn due East will intersect a line drawn from the place of beginning aforesaid parralel with the general course of the Great Miami River "Cf. the Postmaster General to Craig, May 24, 1794, ante, p. 481. »» Ante, pp. 54, 63. - Ante, p. 78.
Page 491
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 491 so as to include one Million of acres within those lines and the said Rivers and from that place upon the said Great River Miami extend- ing along such lines to the place of beginning containing as aforesaid one Million of Acres to be granted to the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates their heirs and assigns upon certain terms & condi- tions as in and by the said Contract bearing date the 15th day of May 178840 reference being thereunto had will fully appear—And whereas by an act of the Congress of the United States bearing date the 12th day of April 1792, entitled "an act for ascertaining the bounds of a tract of Land purchased by John Cleves Symmes" 41—The President of the United States was authorised at the request of the said John Cleves Symmes to alter the said Contract made between the said late board of Treasury and the said John Cleves Symmes in such manner that the said tract may extend from the mouth of the Great Miami to the mouth of the little Miami, and be bounded by the River Ohio on the South, by the Great Miami on the West, by the little miami on the East, & by a parralel of Latitude on the North extending from the Great Miami to the little Miami so as to comprehend the proposed quantity of one Million of Acres; provided that the Northern limits of the said tract shall not interfere with the boundary line established by the Treaty of Fort Harmar, between the United States and the Indian Nations, and provided also, that the President reserve to the U. States such lands at & near Fort Washington as he may think nec- essary for the accommodation of a garrison at that Fort, as in and by the said act reference thereunto had will fully appear. Now these presents witness that I the said John Cleves Symmes have requested and hereby do request the President of the United States that the said Contract so as aforesaid made by the said Com- missioners of the late Board of Treasury on behalf of the said United States of the one part and the said John Cleves Symmes by my said Agents Jonathan Dayton and Daniel Marsh on behalf of myself & my associates of the other part be altered so as to include only the last mentioned tract, butted, bounded and described as in the said act of the Congress aforesaid (subject to the same conditions and with the same limitations & reservations as in the said Contract and Act of Congress are expressed) is set forth. And also subject to the reserva- tion of the quantity of fifteen Acres being for the accommodation of Fort Washington and the garrison thereof and including the said Fort in such part of the said tract as the President of the United States shall find convenient and suitable for military purposes & shall cause to be located therefor and further subject to the reservation of one mile square at or within four miles of the mouth of the Great Miami to 40 Not found. See Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, p. 32; Board of Treasury to Symmes, June 16, 1788, ibid., pp. 31-32. "Ante,'_p. 388.
Page 492
492 TERRITORIAL PAPERS be located by such person as the President of the United States shall appoint for that purpose, provided that a law be passed within the space of two years from the date of these presents to authorise the last mentioned reservation and location and that the President of the United States shall appoint a person to make such location within the space of one year after such law shall be passed. And provided also that the same law shall authorise the President to make and the President shall make & execute to the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates his and their heirs within the said last mentioned term of one year a grant and release of the aforesaid fifteen Acres reserved for the use and accommodation of Fort Washington and the Garrison thereof. And I do hereby for myself and my associates and our heirs remise release and quit claim unto the said United States all right title interest claim and demand whatever in and to so much of the lands contained and included within the bounds & limits described in the said first mentioned Contract as is not contained meant and in- tended to be contained and included within the bounds and limits secondly abovementioned.42 (signed) John C. Symmes Sealed & delivered in the presence of (signed) Wm Bradford ( d° ) Benj" Bankson ALTERATION OF PATENT TO JOHN CLEVES SYMMES [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1797-1806 :C] [September 30, 1794] To all persons to whom these presents shall come, George Washington President of the United States of America sends Greeting— Whereas in pursuance of certain resolutions of the United States in Congress assembled bearing date respectively the 23d & 27th days of July, and the 23rd day of October 1787, or some of them, a Contract was duly made and executed between Samuel Osgood, Walter Livingston & Arthur Lee Esq" Commissioners of the Board of the Treasury of the United States of the first part, Jonathan Dayton & Daniel Marsh Esq" of the second part, and John Cleves Symmes Esqr of the third part, for the purchase and grant of a certain tract of Land in the Western Country adjoining the River Ohio, beginning on the bank of the same River at a spot exactly twenty miles distant along the several courses of the same from the place where the Great Miami empties itself into the said River Ohio from thence extending down 42 See Symmes to Dayton, Sept. 30, 1794, Bond (ed.), Corr. J. C. Symmes, pp. 166-167.
Page 493
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 493 the said River Ohio along the several courses thereof to the Great Miami River thence up the said River Miami along the several courses thereof to a place whence a line drawn due East will intersect a line drawn from the place of beginning aforesaid parralel with the general course of the Great Miami River so as to include one Million of Acres within those lines and the said Rivers and from that place up the said Great River Miami extending along such lines to the place of beginning containing as aforesaid one Million of Acres to be granted to the said John Cleves Symmes & his associates their heirs & assigns upon certain terms and conditions as in and by the said contract bearing date the fifteenth day of May 1788, reference being thereunto had will fully appear. And whereas by an act of Congress of the United States bearing date the 12th day of April 1792, entitled an act for ascertaining the bounds of a tract of land purchased by John Cleves Symmes—The President of the United States was authorized at the request of the said John Cleves Symmes to alter the said Contract made between the said late board of Treasury and the said John Cleves Symmes in such manner that the said tract may extend from the mouth of the Great Miami to the mouth of the Little Miami, and be bounded by the River Ohio on the South, by the Great Miami on the West, by the Little Miami on the East, and by a parralel of Latitude on the North extending from the Great Miami to the little Miami, so as to comprehend the proposed quantity of one Million of Acres provided that the Northern limits of the said tract shall not interfere with the boundary line established by the Treaty of Fort Harmar between the United States and the Indian Nations, and provided also that the President reserve to the U. States such lands at or near Fort Washington as he may think necessary for the accom- modation of a Garrison at that Fort, as in and by the said act reference thereunto had will fully appear. And whereas the said John Cleves Symmes by a certain instrument of writing under his hand & Seal bearing date the day next before the date of these presents did request the President of the U. States that the Contract so as aforesaid made by the said Commissioners of the late Board of Treasury on behalf of the U. States of the one part, and him the said John Cleves Symmes by his said Agents Jonathan Dayton & Daniel Marsh on behalf of himself & his associates of the other part might be altered so as to include only the last mentioned tract, butted, bounded and described as in the said act of the Congress aforesaid is set forth subject to the same conditions and with the same limitations and reservations as in the said Contract and act of Congress are expressed and also subject to the reservation of the quantity of fifteen acres being for the accom- modation of Fort Washington and the Garrison thereof and including the said Fort, in such part of the said tract as the President of the United States should find convenient & suitable for military purposes
Page 494
494 TERRITORIAL PAPERS and should cause to be located therefor and further subject to the reservation of one mile square within four miles of the mouth of the Great Miami to be located by such person as the President of the United States shall appoint for that purpose, provided that a law be passed within the space of two years from the date hereof to authorise the last mentioned reservation & location and that the President of the United States should appoint a person to make such location within the space of one year after such law shall be passed, and pro- vided also that the same law shall authorise the President to make, and the President shall make & execute to the said John Cleves Symmes & his associates and to his & their heirs & assigns within the said last mentioned term of one year a grant & release of the afore- said fifteen acres, reserved for the use & accommodation of Fort Washington and the Garrison thereof (and thereby did remise, release & quit claim unto the said United States all his right title, interest, claim & demand, whatever in and to so much of the lands contained and included within the bounds & limits described in the said Con- tract, as is not contained or meant and intended to be contained and included within the bounds & limits secondly abovemention'd as in and by the said recited instrument relation being thereunto had will appear) Now know ye, that in pursuance of the Act of the Congress aforesaid and the said request of the said John Cleves Symmes, I have assented and by these presents do testify and declare my assent to an alteration of the said Contract in manner following, that is to say—That the tract of land to be granted to the said John Cleves Symmes upon the same terms & conditions as in and by the said Contract made on the 15th day of October 1788, between Arthur Lee, Walter Livingston and Samuel Osgood Commissioners of the board of Treasury, the said Daniel Marsh and Jonathan Dayton and the said John Cleves Symmes were stipulated and agreed upon shall extend from the mouth of the Great Miami to the mouth of the little Miami and shall be bounded by the River Ohio, on the South, by the Great Miami on the west, by the little Miami on the East, by a Parrallel of Latitude on the North, extending from the Great Miami to the little Miami so as to comprehend one Million of Acres, provided that the Northern limits of the said tract shall not interfere with the boundary line established by the Treaty of Fort Harmar, between the United States and the Indian Nations—And reserving out of the said tract the quantity of fifteen acres being for the accommodation of Fort Washington & the garrison thereof, and including the said Fort in such part of the said tract as the President shall find convenient & suitable for military purposes & shall cause to be located therefor. Also reserving out of each township in the said tract the following Lots to wit—Lot N° 16
Page 495
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 495 for the purpose mentioned in the Land Ordinance of the 20th May 1785—Lot N° 29 for the purposes of Religion, and Lots N° 8. N° 11 & N° 26 to be subject to the disposition of the Congress of the United States. And also reserving to the said U. States, out of the said tract, the quantity of one square mile within four miles of the mouth of the great miami to be located by such person as the President of the U. States shall appoint for that purpose, provided that a law be passed within the space of two years from the date of these presents to author- ise the last mentioned reservation & location, and that the President shall appoint a person to make such location within the space of one year after such law shall be passed. And provided also that the same law shall authorise the President to make and the President shall make & execute to the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates, his & their heirs & assigns, a grant and release of the aforesaid fifteen acres reserved for the use and accommodation of Fort Washington & the garrison thereof.«3 In Testimony whereof I have caused these Letters to be made Patent and the Seal of the United States to be hereunto affixed. Given under my hand at the City of Philadelphia the 30th day of Septf in the year of our Lord 1794, and of the Independence of the United States of America the Nineteenth. (Seal) (signed) G°: Washington « Cf. acts of Apr. 12, 1792, ante, p. 388, and May 5, 1792, ante, p. 394; report of Attorney General, May 5, 1796, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 67-68. In a letter of the Secretary of State to the President, Oct. 2, 1794 (SD Archives, Dom. Letters, VII), occurs the following relevant paragraph: "Judge Symmes having objected to the expression, referred to in the Attorney-General's opinion, which is en- closed—I accepted his signature to the paper to be executed by him, with the erasure; upon condition that you should approve. But I refused to alter the act, which you signed, so as to be conformable to the erasure in his, unless I had your express previous assent. Col. Hamilton recollects the transaction so per- fectly, as to render it unnecessary for me to add any observation in vindication of the opinion, that a like change may take place in your act with propriety"— On Oct. 1, the Attorney General had advised the Secretary of State that "Judge Symmes having stated certain objections to the following words introduced into the draught expressing his consent to the alteration of his Contract with the Board of Treasury viz 'in & to the first mentioned contract as aforesd made with the said Samuel Osgood Walter Livingston & Arthur Lee Commissioners of the said Board of Treasury &' I am of opinion that they may safely be struck out and that the residue will be a substantial compliance with instructions given, & with the intention of the President".—From MS., SD Archives (Opinions AUy. Gen.).
Page 496
496 TERRITORIAL PAPERS PATENT ISSUED TO JOHN CLEVES SYMMES « [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1797-1806 :C] [September 30, 1794] In the name of the United States of America. To all to whom these presents shall come. Know ye that whereas it appears to me George Washington Presi- dent of the United States, that John Cleves Symmes in behalf of himself and his associates in pursuance of a Contract made & executed on the fifteenth day of October, one thousand seven hundred and eighty eight; Between Arthur Lee, Walter Livingston, and Samuel Osgood, Commissioners of the board of Treasury, and Jonathan Dayton and Daniel Marsh and the said John Cleves Symmes hath paid into the Treasury of the United States the sum of one hundred and sixty five thousand six hundred ninety three dollars and forty two Cents in Certificates and warrants for Military rights to Lands. Whereby and by virtue of the act of the Congress of the United States entitled "an act authorising the grant & conveyance of certain Lands to John Cleves Symmes & his associates" passed the 5th day of May one thousand seven hundred & ninety two, the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates are become entitled to receive from the United States, letters patent granting & conveying to him & them two hundred and forty eight thousand five hundred & forty acres of Land. And whereas in and by the said Contract it was stipulated and agreed by and between the said Arthur Lee, Walter Livingston, and Samuel Osgood, Commissioners on the part of the United States, and the said Jonathan Dayton, and Daniel Marsh, and the said John Cleves Symmes, that out of each Township which should fall within the grant, to be made to the said John Cleves Symmes and his asso- ciates, a reservation should be made to the United States of the four lotts marked 8.11. 26 & 29, for such purposes as shall by the Congress of the United States be directed and Lot N° 16 for the maintenance of Public Schools the same being pursuant to the regulations con- tained in an Ordinance of the United States in Congress assembled bearing date the twentieth day of May one thousand seven hundred and eighty five. And whereas in and by the aforesaid act of Congress of the U. States passed the 5th day of May one thousand seven hun- dred and ninety two, the President of the United States was author- ized & empowered by Letters Patent to grant & convey unto the said John Cleves Symmes & his associates their heirs & assigns in trust for the purposes of establishing an Academy & other public schools and Seminaries of learning one compleat Township conforma- bly to an order of Congress made the 2d day of October one thousand seven hundred & eighty seven, And Whereas it appears expedient "See the Secretary of State to St. Clair, June 19, 1799, post, III, 26.
Page 497
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 497 to reserve to the United States out of the tract of land hereby intended to be granted the quantity of fifteen acres of Land for the accommo- dation of Fort Washington, and the Garrison thereof, including the said Fort and also a quantity of Land equal to one mile square at or near the mouth of the Great Miami River to be located as hereafter mentioned. Now these Presents testify that I the said George Washington Presi- dent of the United States in the name and by the authority of the said U: States in consideration of the premises in pursuance of the said act of the Congress of the United States passed the 5th day of May 1792, and by virtue of the authority, thereby in me reposed have granted and confirmed and by these presents do grant & confirm unto the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates and to his & their heirs & assigns, all that tract of Land, beginning at the mouth of the Great Miami River, and extending from thence along the River Ohio to the mouth of the little Miami River, bounded on the south by the said River Ohio, on the west by the said Great Miami River, on the East by the said little River Miami and on the north by a parallel of Latitude to be run from the said Great Miami River to the said little Miami River so as to comprehend the quantity of three hundred & eleven thousand six hundred & eighty two acres of Land with the appurtenances, reserving to the United States out of the said tract the quantity of fifteen acres of Land for the accommodation of Fort Washington and the garrison thereof including the space of ground occupied by the said Fort to be located in such part of the sd tract & by such person as the President of the United States shall direct, and also reserving out of the said Tract a quantity of Land equal to one mile square at or near the mouth of the said Great Miami River to be located by such person as the President of the U: States shall appoint for that purpose. Provided that a law be passed by the Congress of the United States to authorize the same within the space of two years from & after the date of these presents, and that the President of the said United States shall appoint a person to make such location within one year after such law shall be passed and not otherwise," And provided also that the same law shall authorize the President of the United States to make and the President shall make & execute to the said John Cleves Symmes & his associates their heirs and assigns a grant & release of the aforesaid fifteen acres reserved for the use & accommodation of Fort Washington and the Garrison thereof—And also reserving to the said United States out of each Township, con- tained in the said tract the follow1ng Lotts, to wit Lot N° 16 for the purposes mentioned & specified in the ordinance of the United States in Congress assembled, passed on the 20th day of May 1785—Lot N° 29 for the purposes of Religion, and Lots N° 11. N° 8 & N° 26 for 45 See Sherman, Original Ohio Land Subdivisions, pp. 69-78. 126650—34 33
Page 498
498 TERRITORIAL PAPERS such purposes as the Congress of the U States shall hereafter direct. To have and to hold the said tract of Land, bounded and described as aforesaid with the appurtenances to the said John Cleves Symmes and his associates, his and their heirs and assigns to his and their proper use and behoof forever according to their respective rights and interests therein, upon this condition however & not otherwise; that the said John Cleves Symmes & his associates, his & their heirs & assigns, shall and do cause the said parrallel of Latitude forming the northern boundary of the tract herein before described, to be truly run, surveyed and laid out, and return thereof made to the Secretary of the Treasury for the time being within the space of five years from and after the date of these presents otherwise as well these presents as the Estate hereby granted shall cease and become void; which parral- lel of Latitude shall be run from certain points or stations which shall have been ascertained & fixed by Israel Ludlow upon the said Great & little Miami Rivers according to a survey by him made of the courses of the said Rivers under the direction of the Department of the Treasury and heretofore certified to that Department by a certificate bearing date the 24 March 1794—And in pursuance of the said act of the Congress of the United States herein before mentioned passed the 5th day of May 1792, it is hereby declared that one compleat Township or tract of Land of six miles square to be located with the approbation of the Governor, for the time being, of the Territory North West of the River Ohio, and in the manner and within the term of five years aforesaid, as nearly as may be in the centre of the tract of land herein- before granted hath been and is granted and shall be holden in trust to and for the sole and exclusive intent and purpose of erecting and estab- lishing therein an Academy & other public schools and seminaries of learning and endowing & supporting the same, & to & for no other use, intent or purpose whatever. In testimony whereof I have caused these Letters to be made Patent, and the seal of the U States to be hereunto affixed. Given under my hand at the City of Philadelphia, the 30th day of September A. D. 1794, and of the Independence of the United States of America, the Nineteenth. (l.s.) (signed) G° Washington By the President (signed) Edm Randolph.
Page 499
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 499 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SF:3 Cong., 2 sess.:C «] Marietta Decr 15th 1794. Sir, By the Ordinance of Congress establishing the Government of the Western Territory, the Supreme Judicial authority is vested in three Judges, two of whom were necessary to form a Court, with power to decide in all matters without appeal, and by a Law of Con- gress, one of those Judges is made competent, also without appeal. Many representations, Sir, have been made to me on this Subject— the people, very generally, think it an unsafe Situation which they are in; and indeed, taking the matter abstractedly, it cannot be thought very eligible, that the whole property of a Country which may [be] the subject of legal dispute, should be governed by the determination of a single Judge, without the possibility of having that determination revised. But circumstances exist at present that ren- der it dangerous for them. The principal Settlements have been made on tracts of Land purchased by certain companies or associations of persons. The first of those is the Ohio Company, and the next that of the Miami. In both these associations, the management of the directors and agents, are thought to have laid the foundation of end- less disputes. General Putnam has been the active director in the first association, and Mr Symmes the principal, if not the sole agent in the second; and they are both Judges of the Supreme Court. Every land dispute will be traced to some transaction of one or other of those Gentlemen in those capacities, and they are to sit in Judgement upon them. It must be acknowledged that this is not a groundless cause of apprehension; for, tho' they are both of very fair character, and delicacy would prevent their Judging in any case where they are themselves parties, Interest hangs an insensible bias on the minds of the most upright men, and in the matters that are most likely to be litigated, in which ever of the associations they happen, there must necessarily be so great a similarity that, deciding in one by a Judge who has no direct interest in the cause, may nevertheless have as direct & certain an effect in another wherein he is interested as if he had determined in his own cause. I believe, Sir, it would therefore be well if—law impowering one Judge to hold the Court could be repealed, and that some mode, were prescribed for bringing the decisions of the Supreme Court here, before the Federal Court, either by direct appeal, or by Writ of Error, or both as cases may require.47 It appears to me, Sir, to be necessary for rendering the people easy and safe; and there are also political ends that would, clearly be served by it, for there is perhaps nothing that contributes "A contemporary copy; a version also appears in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 332-333, under date of Dec. 14, captioned as to Thomas Jefferson. « See St. Clair to the Secretary of State, July 15, 1799, post, III, 57.
Page 500
500 TERRITORIAL PAPERS more to induce an affectionate Submission to any power, than the habit of looking up to that power as the depositary and dispenser of Justice in the last resort. I have thought it my duty to make you acquainted with the fears and wishes of the people upon this Subject, and have the honor to be with great respect, Sir, Your most obedient Servant Ar St Clair. True Copy Ge° Taylor Jr. The honorable Edmund Randolph Secretary of State. [Endorsed] Legis. 2d Sess. 3d Cong. Communication to the Secretary of State from the Governor of the Western Territory relative to a defect in the Judicial System of that Territory. January 8th 1795. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT'S SECRETARY [LC: Washington Papers: ALS] 9 "Clock Ev* 16. Dec 1794 Dear Sir Please to submit to the President of the US., the enclosed letters from Gen1 Wayne of the 17h October,49 (duplicate the first not received) and the 12h of Nov.49 They have been just received I have not perused the enclosures conceiving it proper that the Presi- dent should see the letters as early as possible in the morning as some measure may be proper to be taken thereon in order to lay them before Congress. I shall therefore wait upon him at 9 "Clock tomor- row morning to take his orders respecting the papers.60 Yours H Knox [Endorsed] From The Secy of War 16 Decr 1794 THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO GEORGE MITCHELL [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] General Post Office Jany 2.1795 Mr George Mitchell P Mr at Limestone Sir The long distance of 145 miles from Gallipolis to Limestone, having been found too great to be traversed by one boat, I wrote last August to Major Craig51 to endeavor to make a more equal division of the whole distance from Wheeling to Limestone but this I supppose 49 Not found. 50 Secretary Knox's views and recommendations are embodied in a report to the President, Dec. 29, 1794 (A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 543-544). "Aug. 23, 1794, ante, p. 489.
Page 501
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 501 was not found practicable.—By a letter of the Major's dated 17th of OctorSJ he says you had informed him that you had provided a fourth boat, to meet the mail boat N° 3, & by that means you expected regu- larity in the conveyance. In the same letter the Major says he had "transmitted means of payment of all the mail boat crews up to Octr 1. 1794" Yet you mention in yours of Novr 2362 which is just received, that they had not been paid. Perhaps the Major provided for the three upper boats only. If so, your draught on the General post office for the pay of your boats crew, & also of the post rider from Limestone to Cincinnati, up to the first of January instant shall be paid at sight. I presume there will be no difficulty in your negociat- ing such a bill. In that Case you can pay the men & take their re- ceipts; A plain account of their wages & the payments to be sent with the draught or before it. It will be well to take duplicate receipts, lest some failure should happen those you transmit. I am sorry to learn that provisions have not been duly supplied to the boatmen. I shall write Major Craig on that subject.63— The great want of regularity & expedition in the conveyance of the mail by the Ohio defeats the object of its establishment which at the same time is very expensive. Col° Orr54 has suggested that the mail may be carried by land from Preston 25 or 26 miles above Washington. This would reduce the range of the mail boat N° 3 to 120 miles. If with this reduction the trip backward & forward can be performed in 7 days, I would by all means wish to make the change for the expence of a 4th boat will greatly exceed that of a post rider. In this case the rider to Cincinnati may take in this additional distance to preston & be paid for it what is reasonable.—This I suppose would give him constant employment; for I think in one of your letters you state the distance from Limestone to Cincinnati at 78 miles by land—deduct 4 for the distance from Washington to Limestone, leaving 68, & adding 25 from Washington to preston you have 93 miles as great a distance as it may be conven- ient to travel twice over in a week. If this plan be practicable it is very desirable to have it put in execution; & because much time will be lost before your answer can be received & a reply returned, I would wish to leave the matter to your judgement. If you approve of it let it be done without delay; what you determine be pleased to commu- nicate to the General post office.— Your Solicitude to have the mail by the Ohio continued—the inter- est of that Country, & the great convenience of Government, so strong- ■ Not found. » Jan. 10, 1795, post, p. 502. 54 Alexander D. Orr, Representative in Congress from Kentucky, 1791-1797.
Page 502
502 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ly requiring it—I have no doubt of your cheerfully rendering your aid to effect it, in a manner the most unexceptionable.—The enormous expence of this mail, is a powerful objection to the continuance of it. To place it therefore on a footing the most oeconomical, will demand & receive your attention; & for this you will lay the public under great obligations.— January 10th The foregoing was intended to have been sent by the last mail but before other letters on the subject could be ready the hour for closing the mail arrived. Since that time I have read the letters from you & others which were received during my absence of more than three months on an indian treaty.69 I am now induced to think you did not provide a 4th boat: for in your letter without date but which must have been written in Sepr you suggest that you could send two men in a Canoe to meet the 3d boat between the Big sandy and the Scioto—which you had mentioned to Major Craig. The alteration therefore which I have mentioned on the information of Mr Orr & Mr Brown 57 may be immediately made. I mean for the 3d boat to go no lower down than Preston; & for the Post rider to receive the mail there & convey it by land through Washington to Cincinnati.68— = T. P. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO MAJOR ISAAC CRAIG [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] General P. Office Philad* Jany 10.1795. Major Isaac Craig Sir, The great delays of the mail by the Ohio nearly defeat the object of the establishment, while it is attended with an enormous expence. It is Gen1 Putnam's opinion, that a military post at Scioto would enable us so to divide the whole distance from Wheeling to Fort Washington, that four boats would perform their trips with certainty, each in one week.69 This idea of Gen1 Putnam's of estab- lishing a Post at Scioto, I communicated to Gen1 Knox, before I went to the treaty with the six Nations: but I suppose, it was not thought expedient or circumstances did not admit of it. I have now, on the information of Mr Brown & Col1 Orr, of Ken- tuckey, proposed to Col° Mitchell of Limestone to employ a Post Rider to take the mail at Preston, 25 miles above Limestone and to let the mail-boat N° 3 stop at Preston.60 This will reduce the range of that boat to 120 miles, and if the Boat N° 2. can stay at Gallipolis M Treaty of Canandaigua, Nov. 11, 1794, A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 545. 57 John Brown, Senator from Kentucky, 1792-1803. 59 Cf. the Postmaster General to Mitchell, June 20, 1794, ante, p. 484. M See Putnam to the Postmaster General, Aug. 30, 1794, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 392-394. 80 Cf. the Postmaster General to Mitchell, June 20, 1794, ante, p. 484.
Page 503
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 503 one or two days longer, than it did in Summer I should hope, the original plan might still be executed. The boat N° 1. must in like manner wait at Marietta for boat N° 2. This I suggest on the information of Gen1 Putnam in his letter of the 30th of August61 in which he says, that the boats from Marietta to Wheeling & from Marietta to Gallipolis at that time performed their tours easily in five days. The winter & high water may make some difference: still I hope some time may be gained in this way, and to that I beg your immediate attention: Sending the requisite Orders to the Master boatmen. A letter from Mr McClure of Washington mentions the arrangement . of the mail between Pittsburg & Wheeling, since the short days and bad roads retarded the arrival of the mail from Philad* to be so pre- posterously fixed, that the P Rider to Wheeling is sent off from Pittsburg before the arrival of the mail from Philad* which of course lays a week at Pittsburg. This is such an absurdity as scarcely to be credible. Your agreement with the P Rider is perfectly right—he is to arrive in Wheeling in 24 hours after the mail is closed at Pittsburg: but you do not confine him to any hour of a certain day, when to depart. Let him therefore always be detained, till he gets the Philad* mail, according to the great design of the Establishment and the plain meaning of your agreement with him. Whatever subordinate arrangements Shall be necessary on the subject of this letter, I beg you to make. I pray you also to cause provisions of a good quality or the price of the rations to be furnished to all the boats crews and to provide for a regular payment of their wages. Your draughts on the General P Office for the means will meet with due honour. I am &c T. P. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JUDGE PUTNAM [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D«-'] G. P. O. January 16. 1795 Gen1 Rufus Putnam Marietta Dear Sir Tho' appointed to the department of war,63 yet as nobody has yet been appointed postmaster general,64 I occasionally do business in that department.—I feel particularly concerned to do it when it respects arrangements which I began, but which from any 81 See Buell (ed.), op. cit., pp. 392-394. Relative to the establishment of the postal system in the West, see also the Postmaster General to Putnam, May 24, June 7 and 20, 1794, ante, pp. 482, 483, 486, and Aug. 4, Buell (ed.), op. ext., p. 392; and Putnam to the Postmaster General, June 9, ibid., pp. 388-390. *> Printed also ibid., pp. 395-397. « Jan. 2, 1795. m Joseph Habersham was appointed Feb. 25, 1795.
Page 504
504 TERRITORIAL PAPERS cause have not fully succeeded.—I believe you know that at first it was proposed to employ 4 boats to ply between Pittsburg, or rather wheeling, & Fort Washington. Afterwards it was found that the mail might be carried by land from Limestone to Fort Washington. This lessened the distance about 70 miles: & as on enquiry there ap- peared to be no stations for exchanging the mails but Marietta, Gal- lipolis & Limestone these were fixed on for the purpose.—The conse- quence was that the boat N° 3. plying between Gallipolis, 145 was seldom or ever in time. To remedy this mischief, Col° Mitchell sug- gested to Major Craig that he could send a Canoe to meet the mail from Gallipolis; & from Major Craig's letter to Gen1 post office re- ceived during my absence on a treaty with the six nations, it was understood that this proposition of Col° Mitchells had been carried into effect—But on examining Col° Mitchells letters to the post-office, I concluded that the measure was merely suggested & not executed— The consequence of the failure of the 3d boat has been such intolerable delay of the mail, as almost to discourage a prosecution of the plan of conveying a mail by the Ohio—combining with the delay the great expence attending it. Lately the Kentucky gentlemen have proposed that the mail should stop at Preston, 25 or 26 miles on this side Lime- stone. This will reduce the range of the 3d boat to 120 miles. I have assented to this proposition, & last week wrote to Col° Mitchell to send the post rider from Limestone up to Preston, to take the mail thence by land to Washington (which is 4 miles from Limestone) thence to Fort Washington. This will increase his ride to near 100 miles & give him pretty constant employment. Messr Jn° & George Graham are the Gentlemen at preston to whom I have written to receive the mail from the boat & deliver the one from below. I have further proposed that the boat N° 2 which by one of your letters I see had two spare days to wait one or both of them for the arrival of Boat N° 3 & in like manner boat N° 1 would wait for Boat N° 2. In this manner I have hopes that a regular conveyance of this mail may be effected. But my dear sir, I have not given you this detail merely for infor- mation: I am solicitous to commit the whole business to your direc- tion. Your situation is peculiarly favorably for the purpose as 9 boats weekly arrive at Marietta. I know too for yourself as for the country where you reside you feel most interested to give success to some plan of carrying the mail by the Ohio. I have therefore to request & you are hereby fully authorized to make such arrangements for the purpose as you shall judge best—I am told that the duty of the boats N° 1 & 2 is so light that 2 out of the 4 hands are alternately left at home. Now this cannot be right. If not necessary for the service they should be discharged.—Or if still the duty of boat N° 3 should be too severe, 1 or 2 hands should be added to their present comple- ment.—What I have said in this letter respecting the management of
Page 505
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 505 the boats, you will please to consider merely as hints; the actual arrangement to produce an efficient carriage of the mail, I beg you to make. I shall drop a line for Major Craig & Col° Mitchell to apprize them of the measures I have desired you to take. I shall desire Major Craig to pay regularly all the men employed, & to pay off any that may be discharged.— Your arrangements you will of course communicate to the General post office when I shall see them.— Should the indian war be continued (which God forbid) I shall not fail to communicate to the president your opinion of the utility of a small post at the mouth of the Scioto. I sent your letter on the subject to Gen1 Knox soon after I received it T. P. P. S. It has been suggested to me that the mail boats are much too heavy for pushing with the requisite speed; will you favor me with your ideas on this subject & of the size & form of the boats best adapted to that service? T. P. LIST OF GALLIPOLIS PROPRIETORS [SF:3 Cong., 2 sess.:DS] [February 25, 1795] A Nominal List of Galliopolis purchasers as far as Mr Gervais can exactly recollect the names of persons & amount of their purchases M Letailleur pour M Degoville 4000 Acres M Vendenbenden 1500 M Laforge 950 MWack 1000 M Gervais 4000 M Marais 200 "u Mr" ferrare freres 200 Petit 100 ou 200 Jj Saugrain 200 Micheau 150 ou 200" Matrie 100 Mantrel 100 Bastille 200 Dort 100 Quittel 200 Chevenin 200 Chaudiver 100 Leduc 200 Etienne 1°° Viollet 10° Dubois 100
Page 506
506 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Serrot 100 Freres Duthee 200 Maguet 10° Bertolot 100 Des Noyers 100 Parmentier 100 Priaux 100 LeClerc 200 LeClaire 100 Duduit 100 Freres Vauschert 200 Maldan 100 Manessier 200 Lemoyne 100. Maguet 100 Berte 1°° Morrion 200 Sarrazin tiié par les Indiens 200 Maloher fait prisonnier 100 Daset 10° Serre 1°°- 16,650 Acres Mr Menager 100 16 750 The above List containing only 42 out of 125 inhabitants goes as far as Mr Gervais' Memory permits him to fix his Assertions on par- ticular persons who have purchased and paid for Certain quantities of Land.—But he is satisfied that the amot of purchases actually paid for by the inhabitants is rather above than below 30,000 Acres— Before Mr Rome's (the former Agent's) departure for Philadelphia, a Census was made by the Justice of the peace of the purchases of the inhabitants then present—They amounted to more than 25 000 Acres Those who were at that time absent were not included & many have returned since or intend to return—Mr Gervais believes that proof of the above facts was made to the house of Representatives. Of this Mr Wadsworth who was Chairman of the Committee might give information from his recollection. I certify the above Statement to be true and am ready to attest it upon Oath when required Philad* 25. Feby 1795 J Gervais. [Addressed] Honhle Aaron Burr, Esqr [Endorsed] List of Gallipolis proprietors March 1795.
Page 507
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 507 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO BARTHOLOMEW - DANDRIDGE65 [LC: Washington Papers :ALS] War Office Feby 28.1795. Mr Dandridge will be pleased to hand the inclosed letter and papers88 from General Wayne to the President. The result of the Conference at Greenville between General Wayne & the Indians is this. That a general treaty shall be held at Greenville about the 15th of next June, with the Chippawas, Ottawas, Pattawatamies, Sakies and Miamis, to conclude on articles of peace; agreeably to preliminary articles signed the 21st of January.67 In General Wayne's speech dated January 1st, to Tarhe & other Chiefs at Sandusky, he has this passage. "The Miamis say that the Chiefs of the remaining hostile tribes had acceeded to the prevailing opinion and wish for peace; and that those Chiefs are now on their way to this place (Greenville) & may be expected in the course of a few days after the arrival of the Chiefs of the five nations before mentioned.88"— The papers received do not announce their arrival. The informa- tion of the Miamis was communicated by Col° Hamtranck from the post at the Miami Villages. I have thus mentioned the object and result of the conference for the President's information, if he should not have leisure to read all the papers, which are not interesting.—I may except the speech of Richardville, a Miami Chief, of one of the most hostile tribes, & which is very short—and the preliminary articles for suspending hostilities.69 T. Pickering War Office Feby 28.1795 [Endorsed] From The Secy of War. 28 Feb. 1795. 85 Secretary to the President. M Not found. 87 Enclosed to the Secretary of War, Jan. 24, 1795 (A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, 1, 559-560). The document signed is among the Wayne Papers (HSP). 88 Another extract is printed in A.S.P., op. cit., p. 560. "See Journal Exec. Procs., Apr. 27, 1795, post, ill, 434.
Page 508
508 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] War Office Feby 28.1795. Sir, The inclosed depositions relative to the British post recently established on the Miamis, I have this day received from General Wayne; and transmit them for your information. I send the origi- nals, as it seemed most proper that they should be lodged in your office. I am very respectfully Sir Your obl Servt Timothy Pickering The Secretary of State THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO MAJOR ISAAC CRAIG [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] Gen1 Post Office Phil* March 25 1795 Major Craig Sir I have this week received from Gen1 Putnam his arrangement for carrying the Ohio mail.70 By this the Boat N° 1 will ply between Wheeling and Marrietta; and the boats N° 2 & 3 will in turn perform the whole Voyage thence to Preston (Graham's Station) or Limestone. Thus all the three boats will come to Marrietta, where of course their Services will be ascertained, and can most conveniently to the crews & with most safety to the public be paid, as the wages become due, An arrangement will therefore be made for paying them at Mariette. For this reason you will be good enough to counter order the direc- tions you gave Major Kirkpatrick to provide for paying them at Limestone or Gallipolis. I trust General Putnam's plan will succeed if the post-riders at each end of the water conveyance are regular and punctual. To the upper rider I entreat your attention;71 & am Sir &c T. P. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JUDGE PUTNAM [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] Gen1 Post Office Phil* March 25th 1795 Gen1 Rufus Putnam Sir I have received your favour of Feby 20th 72 It was due the 21" Instant but some obstruction, I suppose at the Susquehannah or other waters, prevented its arrival till the 23d 70 Feb. 20, 1795, with plan enclosed, printed in Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 398-404. » See also the Postmaster General to Putnam, Jan. 16, 1795, ante, p. 503. » Buell (ed.), op. ext., pp. 398-404.
Page 509
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 509 I am much obliged by your attention to the Ohio Mail: I doubt not the arrangement you have made will prove successful. As the immediate direction of the business will be at Mariette and the performance of duty by the boatsmen be there ascertained; and as the boats N° 2. & N° 3. as well as N° 1. arrive there in their turns, it will certainly be proper to have them paid there. This I shall advise to have done thro Mr Meigs73 the Post master, as you suggest—untill a new Postmaster General shall otherwise direct. I have thought that as soon as peace shall be made with the Indians North of the Ohio the mail might be carried by land not only incom- parably cheaper, but with more expedition & certainty I wish you to think of this matter, and of the most eligible route.—I feel much confidence that we shall have peace with the Indians, and then I suppose ferries will be established by settlers at all the deep waters to facilitate the passing of travellers74 I am Sir &° T. P. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO JUDGE TURNER [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C] [April 28, 1795] Sir A few days ago, I received a Letter from William St Clair Esqr Prothonotary and Register of the County of Sl Clair dated Decr 20th 1794 enclosing a Copy of a Letter from You to him on the 5 Novr in that year together with his Answer of the 11lh, and your replication of the 15th75—These Letters, Sir, respect the Records of that County and the place where they have been deposited and kept, and the last contains a peremptory Order to deposit them at Kaskaskia, as being the acknowledged County Town where the general Court would soon sit. The General Court, Sir, may sit wherever the Judges think proper in any County, and it is to be presumed they will always use that discretion so as to render the Session most convenient to the Inhabitants in the County Town or otherwise as that may be but the Sessions of the supreme Court has nothing to do with the County Records—In any Case litigated in that Court where recourse to the County Records becomes necessary, I presume it would be the Duty of the party who had occasion for them to obtain authenticated tran- scripts of the necessary Papers where originals were not to be had—I believe it would be unsafe to have the Records on every occasion brought into Court—the Officer ought not to let them go out of his possession, and I think the Register of the County of St Clair was wrong in Doing so, even in obedience to your Order and the Person * Return Jonathan Meigs, jr. « Cf. the Postmaster General to Judge Turner, Sept. 7, 1795, post, p. 536. "The four letters are in the St. Clair Papers (OSL).
Page 510
510 TERRITORIAL PAPERS who reca them was wrong also, and would find if a prosecution should ensue that your authority would not justify him. I conceive, Sir that a Judge in his judicial Capacity, has not any thing to do with Record keepers, except upon complaint in common course of Law, for some misdemeanor in Office, and no Power, in any case over the Records.—These are my Ideas on the Subject, but I may be mistaken. I am sure I am not mistaken when I say you had no authority to intermeddle with Indian Affairs—and about all, with any accounts Current that might have been between Mr St Clair and me, but which, as he informs me, you demanded from him. I am sorry, Sir, that, on any accasion, I should differ in opinion with you, and still more so, that by any means the execution of official duties should have to they appear to me to be quite distinct, and it is my wish to keep them so— The Appointment to offices is the prerogative of the Governor. Many of the Offices and particularly the Registers are purely executive—if the persons appointed are incapable or unfaithful but in a degree not to be liable to criminal prosecution, it is his province to remove or correct them, & it is not until a crime has been committed that the judicial Courts interfere. As to County Towns, whether you think proper to acknowledge them or not, the Governor is by Law empow- ered to appoint the places where the Courts are to be held in each County—a law which also recd your assent and you must have seen Sir that without such a Measure Justice could not have been admin- istered at all, as each of the districts was too inconsiderable for a County, and all of them at too great a distance from each other to be united. As the records may be considered to be in your Custody, I should be glad if you would direct the Person to whom you have committed them to restore them to Mr St Clair—If that is not done, I must find some means to get them out of his hands. P. S.—In a letter of yours to Colonel Sargent which he sent to me I find this passage: "since the letter was delivered, Mr St. Clair (who has not acted in the fairest manner possible), has put into my hands an open letter, etc." As it is my duty to give the officers of government all due countenance and protection while they act with propriety, so it is my determination to bring them to punishment where they act improperly. I have therefore to request that you will be pleased to specify the instances when Mr Sl Clair has acted unfairly, and I have written to him that such a charge is alleged against him, and that I have required the specification. [Endorsed] Copy to Judge Turner, April 28h 1795
Page 511
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 511 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO SECRETARY SARGENT [MHS: Sargent Papers: C ™] Marietta, April 28,1795. Dear Sir:—Once more I am returned to the Territory and arrived at this place a few days ago. My absence from it at the time I had appointed a meeting of the Legislature must have surprised you, but I found it necessary to visit the settlements in the upper part of the County, and having a sum of money considerably at risque in West- moreland County, I took that time which was near the session of Greensburgh Court, to which I would go in a few days, to secure it, and had calculated the whole time of my absence at two weeks; but the Winter set in so suddenly and with such violence that it was impossible to return had I been in a situation to attempt it. I was not, for at Greensburgh I was seized by the Gout and with difficulty got to my family tho' but eighteen miles distant where I was confined to my bed in the most excruciating torture for upwards of two months. About the beginning of March, when a little recovered, I attempted the journey, and relapsed the second day in consequence, and on my journey now, was again attacked and confined upwards of a week in a miserable hovel by the way, notwithstanding which, tho' still lame and very feeble, I am in health, and shall recover again for a little while. I propose to set out for Cincinnati about the end of next week. At this place I found your letters of the 23rd 77 and 27th of December,78 of the 4th79 and 24th of January and of the 14th of Feb- ruary last.80 I have still to regret, Sir, that more than one letter I wrote to you, before my former arrival in the Territory, did not get to your hand. They would have prevented some mortification and saved some trouble to us both. The miscarriage of letters to and from me has been very extraordinary and unaccountable. I have also still to regret that either my recollection or yours, with respect to my passing last Winter at Muskingum, had not been perfectly correct; for, as I observed to you, I expected to have met you there, and in consequence of our conversation at Philadelphia doubted not in the least that tho' you were not arrived, you were on your way up, and looked for you eagerly and anxiously from day to day (which was the reason I did not write) until some person arrived from Fort Washington who had breakfasted with you the morning he set out from thence and informed me of your still being there without any 71 From a typed copy. 77 The original of this letter was at one time among the St. Clair Papers (OSL) but is now missing. 78 Not found. "St. Clair Papers (OSL). 80 The last two letters are missing.
Page 512
512 TERRITORIAL PAPERS thoughts of leaving it. It was not till then that I wrote you, because I supposed you on the River and any letter addressed to you at Cincinnati must necessarily have missed you. The prosecutions, however, these mistakes have given birth to need give you very little uneasiness, and as to the disposition of the people you had it not to learn. I can recollect no conversation, for a long time at least, on the subject of the seat of Government, but I can remember that we both thought Marietta would not answer, and, in the present circumstances, I still think so; but it was always my intention to keep it, so far as it depended upon me, unfixed till there should be an end of the Indian war, and the country laid open for settlement, after which it will probably be divided into more than one government, and it would be easier to determine the most eligible place, if it should not. While things remain in their present situa- tion—while the establishments are so distant from each other and the communications so difficult—while there is not a single road thro' the country, I believe it would be improper to fix upon any place to which the inhabitants should be, in certain cases, obliged to resort; and that it will be necessary for some time to come that both the executive and legislative parts of government should be ambulatory— neither do I think the transportation of the records, as they are as yet far from being cumbrous, any strong objection to it. I doubt not but on reflection you will recollect this has always been my way of thinking. I assure you, Sir, it was neither pleasure nor emolument that led to it, but what appeared to me the interest of the people, for which the government was established. But if you suppose I wantonly took a step which would involve you in difficulty or expense, which from your frequently repeating the words "your pleasure," and your readiness to acquiesce in it, it seems as if you had, you wrong me. It is contrary to my disposition to treat any person in the world in that manner, but above all a person I esteem as I do Colonel Sargent, whose convenience in every respect I shall always be happy to consult and contribute to. The letters of Mr. Vanderburgh I returned to you,81 for I thought it would be more proper that he himself should address his complaint to the Secretary of State than that it should be made either by you or me, and I recommended that he should take that step. I hope and trust that you have received them. I have a letter from Mr. St. Clair of the Illinois country82 complaining of very extravagant treatment he has met with also from Judge Turner, and informing me that in consequence of it he has written to you requesting leave to resign his offices.83 I hope you have not complied with his request, and I wrote 81 See St. Clair to the Secretary of State, July 18,1795, post, p. 522. » Nov. 11, 1794, St. Clair Papers (OSL). ■ Not found.
Page 513
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 513 to him84 to hold them at least until some means can be found to bring the Judge to reason. Should you be writing to St. Vincennes I wish you would procure a certified copy of the presentment of the Grand Jury against the Judge. From the present view of things, it seems to me that I shall be obliged to visit that country immediately to prevent, if it yet can be prevented, the subversion of all order, if not the total ruin of the country. Adieu, my dear Sir, always with great regard and affection, Your very humble servant, A. St. Clair To Hon. Winthrop Sargent, Cincinnati. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO JUDGE TURNER [OSL: St. Clair Papers: C] Marietta May 2? 1795 Sir By the Mail Boat from Cincinnati I recd this morning the Letter you did me the honor to write on the 25 of November last,85 which it seems was forwarded to that place by Express on the 28 of that month—I can account for the delays it has met with only from certain indorsements on the Cover, one of which is "Missent"—the other, "Cincinnati, 19th April, 1795." I have extracted Sir several parts of that Letter particularly the three first paragraphs and enclosed them to the Secretary of War, and the 9th 10th 11th and 12th to the Secretary of State.86 It gives me pain to hear of complaints against the Judges tho it is by no means improbable that they are ill-founded—I would, however, fondly hope that, if they have been guilty of any improprieties, they have proceeded from a mistaken Judgt, and not a perverted Will. I wish they had been confined to the notice sent. I have complaints of a serious nature that reach another District. You must be sensible Sir, that to find Persons in that Country, who are capable of perform- ing the Duties of Judges in a strictly legal manner is impossible—It is true there have been but five Judges appointed in the Cy of St. Clair, and hard it was to find five in the Coy when it was laid out and, at that time, no more could be appointed if more qualified Persons could have been found. I shall be happy to find that it can produce more of that description now. If there are complaints against any of the County Officers, I am of opinion they should have been made to me, even if « Not found. See St. Clair to William St. Clair, June 3, 1795, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 372-374; petition of inhabitants of St. Clair County relative to the conduct of Judge Turner, A.S.P., Misc., I,151-152; report of the Attorney General thereon, May 9, 1796, ibid., p. 151; report of House committee, Feb. 27, 1797, ibid., p. 157; Annals, 4 Cong., 2 sess., 2166, 2320. u Not found. The enclosures, Nov. 4, 11, and 15, 1794, are among the St. Clair Papers (OSL). M See letter following. See also St. Clair to Turner, Apr. 28, 1795, ante, p. 509. 126650— 34 34
Page 514
514 TERRITORIAL PAPERS they were of such a Nature as to require a criminal prosecution—When brought before the general Court in that way, and I know of no other in which they can be brought before it, to be sure they would claim its Attention. You will pardon me Sir, I hope, if I doubt the power of that court to hold a special Session. The local Situation of the Inhabitants of the County of St. Clair, where they are divided into distinct and distant settlements, none sufficiently populous to furnish even the necessary Officers for a County, subjects them to great inconveniences. It was the only Reason for dividing the County into districts and an Expectation was had that an encrease of People would soon put it in the power of the Govt to erect each district into a separate County, and of course those inconveniences would cease, but instead of encreasing the Numbers the People have decreased considerably some alteration will therefore be necessary, and I thank you Sir, for the hints you have suggested.87 To all you have said with respect to Licenses and Indian Affairs, I will only repeat what in substance I had the honor to observe to you in my last, that I conceive the Indian Department to be wholly out of your Province, and to Add, that in my conception the Duties of a Judge are neither inquisitorial nor executive. As to what relates to the Secy, I know not Sir, whether it is intended as official complaint or private information only—if the first, as it is destitute of any testimony whereon to ground a prosecution, I cannot take notice of it—If it had been accompanied with testimony, I pre- sume it is not to me it should have been addressed, for the Secy is not under my Control. The territorial statute is not only virtually repealed, but, in my Judg\ always was a nullity. I have often thought of an Escheator, but, until the expiration of a certain form of the Estates which have been abandoned can not escheat and when they do it will be to the U. S., and not to the Territory—the same I believe with respect to those where no heirs are known. I know Sir of no fund for the payment of expresses nor any public Office upon which I can count but on which you may draw for that purpose. I am obliged to pay for the postage of all Letters, that do not come franked by some Person having authority, out of my private Pocket (this of yours comes exactly to one hundred Cents), and amounts to a considerable Sum in the Year. The necessity must be both urgent and evident to support the admission of such a Charge for the paying of them at the Treasury of the U. S. but it is there only, I believe, that it can be allowed. My last Letter has anticipated any reply that might have been necessary to your P. S. of the 28 Novr respecting Mr St Clair 87 For the original arrangement, see Journal Exec. Procs., Apr. 27, 1790, post, III, 301. Cf. St. Clair to Sargent, Apr. 28, 1795, ante, p. 511.
Page 515
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 515 I have the honor to be with great Respect Sir—Your very hble Servt P. S. on further reflection I have thought it best to extract the 18th paragraph also respecting the payt of the Express and send it to the Secy of State. HOnb,e Judge Turner. [Endorsed] Copy to Judge Turner May 2d 1795 88— GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [CHS:Wolcott Papers: ALS B9] Marietta May 4th 1795 Sir, By the last Mail from Cincinnati I received a Letter from Judge Turner, dated at Kaskaskia on the 24th of November 1794,90 from which I have thought it necessary to trouble you with the following Extracts. "I have caused some seizures to be made under the Act of Congress of 1792,91 and the Merchandize is held for adjudication. I cannot but contemplate that Law with some regret, as it is open to evasions and has, in some instances, been evaded before my Eyes. I feel the more regret,—because it virtually repeals the territorial Statute made to suppress illicit traffic, and which was every way competent to the purpose, tho' possibly—rather too severe. Under the present Law, the Indian Merchandize is not seizable, unless found in the indian Country—a very indefinite term. Besides as it cannot be supposed that our civil Officers are resident in the Indian Country, but on the contrary in towns and settlements, the first knowledge we usually have of the illicit Trader's arrival with Goods is from himself, on landing at some Town or Settlement to sell them to such Indians as may come in to trade. Others go directly into what I would term the Indian Country, that is not more than 10 or 15 Miles, perhaps, from the Set- tlements^—there they send off runners to invite the Indians, who instantly crowd in to make their purchases. I fancy but few Sherifs 88 See St. Clair to William St. Clair, June 3, 1795, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 372-374. 89 This letter was transmitted by Secretary Randolph to Secretary of the Treasury Wolcott (see the latter to St. Clair, June 20, 1795, post, p. 521), which explains the presence of the autograph letter among the Wolcott Papers. An incomplete copy is printed in Smith (ed.), op. eit., pp. 350-351. On the question as to which heads of departments the territorial Governor should correspond with, see the Secretary of State to St. Clair, Sept. 13, 1793, ante, p. 460. "Not found. The discrepancy between this date and that given in St. Clair's letter to Turner, May 2, ante, p. 513, is found in the MSS., both of which are in St. Clair's hand. 9l Act of May 2, 1792, 1 Stat. 259-263.
Page 516
516 TERRITORIAL PAPERS could be found hardy enough to face such Traders thus surrounded by savages, who would without hesitation make the traders cause their own. I mean however to make the Experiment soon; but shall take care to have the Sherif supported by the Posse of his County. There have lately gone out from Kakokia to a point at no great dis- tance, 14 or 15 Horses packed with indian merchandize, the property of british traders." "Something must be done to give an effectual Check to this illicit traffic. I will state a Circumstance in proof of the necessity of it. Last Year, one Duquette, a Store keeper at Michilimackinac sent to Vincennes a Cargo of Indian Goods to the amount of 50 or 60,000 Livres. These Goods were there given away, not sold, to the Indi- ans—and this was done by the express order of Du Quette for obvious purposes. Some appearance of a Sale was indeed kept up: The Clerk would tell an Indian, after handing to him Goods worth 50 or 60 Livres, to give such a Skin in return, perhaps a Fox or a Beaver Skin only. I am opined the whole returns for that Cargo did not exceed 5,000 Livres. du Quette is a Man of no fortune: Those Goods, then, were evidently the british Kings, and sent to destroy the Credit of our traders, and alienate the Affections of the Savages. This Year, the same Person had the audacity to send another Cargo towards Vincennes, but previous to its arrival at the Town, I dispatched an armed Barge with the Sherif on board,—and that and another Cargo were intercepted 20 Miles below the Town, seized and brought up to it, where they now lie for adjudication." "Since I am upon this Subject, give me leave, Sir, to suggest the propriety of a Law to declare Vincennes, Fort Massac, Kaskaskia and Cahokia Ports of Entry where Goods Wares and Merchandize coming from Canada and the british Ports, as well as from the spanish domin- ions should be subjected to an import.92 Some millions worth of Livres are annually sent to those places, * and I conceive it impossible in the present state of things, to prevent totally the importation of Goods from the spanish side and Canada. The Communication is easy, and the People having no atlantic connexions, are in the old established habit of getting their supplies from those Quarters. By establishing Ports of Entry, then we shall gain that import here, which cannot be received at the Ports of the United States. Congress, I 92 See sec. 17, act of Mar. 2, 1799, 1 Stat. 637-639. ♦Note. Last Year the british alone sent into the Territory 150 Boats and Canoes laden with Goods; viz 110 to the Bay puante and 40 down the Illinois River. The Cargoes may be averaged at, (and it is a moderate calculation) 10,000 Livres a piece. This gives a total of 1,500,000 livres, equal to 300,000 Dollars. All those are paid for in furs and peltry which are sent up the Illinois to Michilimackinac, and thence to St Laurence, where they are shipped for Europe. Hence the British may be said to engross the whole of the american fur trade. [Footnote on the MS.] •
Page 517
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 517 think, would have no Objection to give up the Duties so received to the Territory—and thus we should be furnished with a fund sufficient for a while to answer the territorial necessities without continuing the Store Tax—a Tax which from its unequal operation, is generally, and purely, I think censured. Besides it brings but little money into the Treasury." "Whether the proposed plan should or should not be agreeed to, there is one arrangement absolutely necessary, in either case to give effect to the Act of Congress as it stands—I mean armed Boats or Galliots. One ought to cruize from Cahokia up the Missisippi— another up the Illinois, and a third to be stationed at Fort Massac. This Measure would subject to inspection every Cargo bound for the Territory, whether spanish or british property, or the property of our own Citizens trading without License. It might also be made a Check upon the spanish supplies to the Cherokee and other hostile Indians. "The Express who carries this, may possibly want some accom- modation towards his return. Should he proceed no farther than Cincinnati I have agreed to allow him Twenty five Dollars—but if to Philadelphia and back, then he is to receive one hundred Dollars. He will expect part payment at one place or the other, and for the re- mainder it will be necessary for me to draw on some public Officer, whom you will please to point out." To those, Sir, except to the last, I have made no other reply than that they have been forwarded to you. But I will take the liberty to observe that, with a View to the extension of the Indian Trade, the Prairie de Chiennes is a place of considerable consequence, and to refer you to some Observations I had the honor to make to Mr Jefferson, in a Report of my proceedings in the illinois Country, in the year 1790, which is in your Office. f That Report,94 Sir, embraces, if I have not forgotten, most or all of the Objects adverted to in the Judges Letter.—to the last Paragraph I thought it necessary to inform him that, I knew of no fund for the payment of expresses, nor any public Officer that I could point out, on whom he might draw for that purpose.—that I paid the postage of all Letters, (unless frank'd by some Person having authority) that came to me, out of my private pocket (and this from him had cost me exactly one hundred cents) and amounted to a considerable Sum in the Year;—and that the necessity of employing expresses must be both urgent and evident to procure the admission of a charge for them at the Treasury of the united States. t The Prairie du Chiennes is a place mentioned in that part of Judge Turners Letter which I have sent to the Secretary of War." [Footnote on the MS.] 83 Not found. M Feb. 10, 1791, ante, pp. 322 et seq.
Page 518
518 TERRITORIAL PAPERS This, Sir, is a very extended Country, and from a variety of causes, would require the Eye and the Hand of the executive in every part of it.—but, as that is impossible at all times, you may perceive that Judge Turner seems inclined to take some of the trouble upon himself. I have however been obliged to remind him, upon another occasion, that the executive and judicial authority and duties are quite distinct, and, that it was my intention to keep them so—and that his office is neither inquisitorial nor executive. The above mentioned Letter contains also several complaints against the Secretary, and others, on which I have observed to him that, if they were intended as Complaints to be taken notice of officially, as they were unacompanied with any proof whereon to ground a prosecution I could do nothing with them;—and that, as to the Secretary, had they been attended with proofs, as he was not under my controle, it was to you, Sir, and not to me they should have been addressed; and farther that the territorial Statute, regulating trade with the Indians,96 which possibly had been infringed, was not only virtually repealed by the Act of Congress but was and always had been a Nullity. These interferences, and the Confusion that ensues, create a great deal of trouble to me; and the Country on the Missisippi is now ih that Situation that the presence of the Governor has become indis- pensible I must therefore make the Journey as soon as it is possible— God knows I am in a bad state for travelling. I have the honor to be with great Respect Your obedient Servant A. Sl Clair The Address of the Judge's Letter is somewhat singular, Arthur St Clair, Governor of the N. W Territory & superintendant of Indian Affairs—to be opened in his Absence at Cincinnati and Philadelphia by the Secretary of State Philadelphia [Endorsed] St Clair A. May 4. 95 recd May 15. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE BRITISH MINISTER [SD:Dom. Letters, vm:C] Department of State May 11.1795. Mr Hammond, Minister Plenipy of his Britannic Majesty. Sir I have the honor of inclosing to you a copy of a letter from Edmund Burke,98 vicar general of Upper Canada to the Wyandot 9« See act of July 19,1790, Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvn), 26-28. M See Lieutenant Governor Simcoe to Rev. Edmund Burke, Sept. 5, 1796, Mich. Hist. Colls., xxv, 130-131, for an explanation of the latter's political mission among the Indians. For references to the letter mentioned, which was inter- cepted by American agents, see Burke to McKee, Jan. 31 and June 17, 1795, ibid., xi, 159, XII, 169-170, and the same to Littlehales, June 17, 1795, ibid., XX, 406-407. For a sketch of Burke, see Quaife (ed.), Askin Papers, II, 32.
Page 519
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 519 Indians of Sandusky. I entertain a confidence that it will be trans- mitted to Lord Dorchester, in order that he may act on the subject of it, as the existing state of things seems to require. His Lordship will immediately discern, that an attempt to dissuade those Indians from treating with the United States, is not conformable with the views, which he has professed. I have the honor to be with great respect Sir yr mo. ob. serv. Edm: Randolph. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :ALS] War Office May 16. 1795. Sir, The inclosed letter from Governor Sl Clair was received yester- day by post.97 The proposed visit of the Chiefs of the Sioux, Puans &c. will be postponed of course, at least for one year—unless they come forward without an invitation or consent. Were it otherwise, I should doubt the expediency of the visit. All the means of attaching those numerous Indian nations to the United States it would seem to me better to have suspended until we get possessed of the Western posts: for they would naturally increase the efforts of the British to retain them in their interest, and perhaps prove a concealed motive for procrastinating the delivery of the posts. When that delivery takes place, they may be satisfied with a visit to the principal officer of the United States at Detroit or Michilimackanac; and then too the intercourse by trade may, advantageously commence. These ideas, as they have immediately occurred, are respectfully submitted to the President of the United States. Timothy Pickering [Endorsed] The Secy of War. May 16. 1795. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO TENCH C0XE [SD:Dom. Letters, vm:C] [June 1, 1795] The Secretary of State has the honor of inclosing to the Commis- sioner of the Revenue an extract from a letter of Govr St Clair of the 5th Ultimo,98 as to the extension of the Excise law. June 1. 1795 Extract of a letter from Govr Sl Clair to the Secretary of State, dated Marietta May 5. 1795. The Commissioner of the Revenue has sent on to the Collector of this District Licenses for selling foreign distilled spirits and wines by 9 7 Apr. 23, 1795, St. Clair Papers (OSL). » Not found.
Page 520
520 TERRITORIAL PAPERS retail. It is generally thought that the law forbidding the sale of those articles without license does not extend to this Territory—some persons will refuse to take license and the Collector will think himself obliged to prosecute them. Should the Collector be defeated, and I am persuaded he will be, the collection of the Revenue might be embarrassed in other instances where the law is clear. I gave him my advice, to state the difficulty to the Commissioner, and get his further instructions before he issued licenses. It arises from this circumstance that the excise law is expressly extended to the Territory and the license law is not; neither until that extension was any excise required here; and from a confidence in the general principle that the laws of the United States do not extend to either of the Territorial Districts unless they be named in them. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [OSL:St. Clair Papers: C 1] June 19th 1795 Sir I have attentively considered the question which you stated to me yesterday & have now the honor to transmit you my opinion upon it—I understand it to be the following, viz—Whether the Act laying duties on licenses for selling Wines & foreign distilled Spirit- uous Liquors by retail,2 is to be considered as extending to and opera- ting upon the Citizens resident in the Territory North West of the Ohio? There can be no doubt, that all the laws of Congress, unless local in their nature or limited in their terms, are, in their operation coex- tensive with the Territory of the United States, and obligatory upon every person therein, except independent Nations & Tribes of Indians residing on Indian lands—There is I conceive no ground for the opin- ion that the North Western & South Western Territories are not to be considered as comprehended in the general terms of a Law, and that they must be specially and particularly named in an Act of Congress in order to include them—Independent of the general prin- ciple which governs this case, it may be observed that the ordinance for their government explicitly directs that they shall be subject to all the acts and ordinances of the United States in Congress assem- bled—The contrary doctrine ought not to be admitted in any case, much less in that of an Act laying "duties, imposts or excises" which, by the express direction of the Constitution must be "uniform throughout the United States." 1 This was the official copy sent by the Secretary of the Treasury to St. Clair. It has been printed in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 377-378; the variations between the copy and the printed version are unusually numerous. »June 5, 1794, 1 Stat. 376-378.
Page 521
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 521 The Act under consideration is not limited either in its terms or its nature to the several States. but extends to "every" person who shall deal in the selling of "Wines or foreign distilled Spirits," &c, and must therefore operate throughout the United States wherever there are proper Organs for carrying it into execution—These are the Supervisors and Officers of Inspection who are in the manner di- rected in the Act authorized to issue the licences & collect the duty. The Act for collecting a revenue on distilled Spirits & Stills3 cer- tainly extended to every part of the United States; but as there was no authority for forming Districts and appointing the proper Officers except in the States, the Act could not be carried into execution in the North West & South West Territories. To remedy this defect, the President was authorized, by an Act passed on the same day with that under consideration to erect Districts within the Territories and to appoint Supervisors, &c, therein4—Supervisors, when thus appointed immediately become the Organs for carrying not only that Act into execution but also the license Act: and I can perceive nothing in the latter that can with reason be interpreted into an intention to exempt the Citizens in one part of the United States from the payment of a duty which the Constitution directs should be imposed upon the whole. I have the honor to be with great Esteem Sir Your most obedient Servt (Signed) Wm Bradford The Secretary of the Treasury. [Endorsed] Wm Bradford June 19—17955 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] Treasury Department June 20th 1795 Sir The Secretary of State has transmitted to this Department an extract of your Letter to him dated May 5th 1795.6 As to the intima- tion therein given that the Laws of the United States are not deemed to extend to either of the Territorial Districts unless they are specially named appeared to me to countenance an inadmissible pretension, I » May 8, 1792, 1 Stat. 267-271. • June 5, 1794, 1 Stat. 378-381. • The date of the receipt of this paper by St. Clair is in some doubt. It was not enclosed in the letter of the Secretary of the Treasury, June 20, infra, as therein stated; see St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, July 24,1795, post, p. 523. See also letter of the same to the same, Dec. 3, 1795, Smith (ed.), op. cit., pp. 378-383, wherein the day, but not the month, is given of the receipt of a letter from Wolcott, which probably contained the opinion. • Not found.
Page 522
522 TERRITORIAL PAPERS have lost no time in obtaining the opinion of the Attorney General on the point, a copy of which I have the Honour to enclose.7 I have only to observe that as I perfectly concur with the opinion expressed by the Attorney General, the Officers of the Revenue will be instructed to enforce a Compliance with the Law, & that I count entirely upon the co-operation of the Magistracy & Officers of the District over which you preside. I have the honor to be With perfect respect Sir Your most Obed Servt Oliv: Wolcott Jr. The Governor of the Territory Northwest of the Ohio. [Endorsed] Marietta. forwarded.8 GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C] Cincinnati July 18 1795 Sir Two days ago I received the enclosed Letter from Henry Vanderburgh Esquire Judge of Probate for the County of Knox and the depositions accompanying it.9 The Letter from a Person of the name of D Argi'lleupe was received some time in May and another from the same Person to Judge Symmes which was put into my hands by him. They contain heavy complaints against Judge Turner—but as in the last there was no request that it should go farther I contented myself with informing the Complainant that the Conduct of the Judge could not be enquired into but by the General Government: As Van- derburghs Letter, however, has put it upon me to transmit it to you, and I know how very ignorant the People of that Country in general are, and how little capable of seeking redress if they are injured, having always been accustomed to look up to a Command*r as the proper Course and no farther, I thought it would not be improper to send those likewise. The Judge has been furnished with Copies of the first Letters and depositions, and I verbally informed him of that from D'Argilleupe. I am very sorry Sir to be obliged to trouble you so often with the Affairs of this Government which I certainly 7 Not so enclosed at this time; see St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, July 24, 1795, post, p. 523. » Answered July 24, and at greater length, Dec. 3, 1795 (Smith, ed., St. Clair Papers, n, 378-383). See also the Attorney General to the Secretary of State, Aug. 22, 1799, post, III, 66. • Not found. See St. Clair to Turner, Dec. 14, 1794, Smith (ed.), op. eit., 330-332; to Sargent, Apr. 28,1795, ante, p. 512; to Turner, May 2, 1795, ante, p. 513; and to the Secretary of State, January, 1796, post, p. 544.
Page 523
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 523 should not, if I did not conceive myself called to it by way of official duty. With Sentiments of the greatest respect I have the honor to be Sir, Yr obedient Servant Ar Sl Clair The honorable Edd Randolph Secy of State [Endorsed] Copies of two Letters to the Secy of State dated July 18th and August 25th 1795. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [OSL: St. Clair Papers: C] Cincinnati, July 24th 1795 Sir, The Letter you did me the honor to write on the 20th of June,10 came to hand on the 20th instant, and I would have replied to it immediately, if the Post has not departed before the Letters he brought were delivered, and I am the more concerned that the oppor- tunity was missed, as the opinion of the Atty General which my Letter of the 5 May to the Secty of State had occasioned you the trouble to take, was not enclosed, as you therein mention it to be—Your Letter contained no Enclosure whatever. The intimation Sir, given by me to the Secty of State (but which might, I suppose without a breach of propriety, have been addressed directly to you), that the Laws of the united States are not deemed to extend to either of the territorial Districts, I thought it my duty to give on that occasion because I supposed ill consequences might follow from a Question arising on a Revenue Law being decided in a Court of Law against the Revenue Officer or other, suing for the penalty attached to a breach. I did believe (and still do believe it) that with respect to the penalty for selling foreign distilled Spirits and Wine without license, it would happen. Whether it be an inadmissible pretention or not, that the terri- torial Districts are not bound by laws of the united States unless specially named, is not for me to determine—It is however no new pretension—and is a Doctrine which has long been held with respect to colonies—and those Districts are as yet no part of the-united States but dependencies upon them, and have ever been considered in con- gress as colonies. The Duty laid on domestic distillation was never conceived to extend to them, or attempted to be collected in them under the general Law It was extended to them by a Supplementary Act," in which they are expressly named—a measure recommended by » Ante, p. 521. » June 5,1794,1 Stat. 378-381.
Page 524
524 TERRITORIAL PAPERS me to the late Secretary of the Treasury.12 That very Act in which they are thus expressly named, and other revenue Laws, in which they are not named, came to be put in operation here at one and the same time. That Diversity alone would have been enough to have raised a Doubt if the matter had never before been thought of. But, Sir, I recollect a Conversation with Mr. Randolph, when Attorney General, on the Subject, when he expressed a sentiment similar to that which has been transmitted to you, from my Letter to him—He did also express a like Sentiment to Judge Turner in another conversation, as the judge has informed me and it likewise was the Opinion of Mr Jefferson, tho' perhaps neither of those Gentlemen expressed them- selves so strongly as in the Words used by me for obvious reasons, I chose to express Myself as strongly as I could. It is, Sir, of little Consequence what my own Opinion on this Subject may be, because, judicially, I can never have any thing to do with it, and executively, the Govern1" has a right to command my cooperation with its measures, wherever that co-operation can take place—my disposition to do so, I trust is not doubted. The magis- tracy, Sir, by whom is meant, I suppose the judges of the different Courts, will, doubtless pay due regard to the opinion of the Attorney General—but, unless I intended in the present case to impress them, unfavorably, I should be unwilling to tell them that you count upon their co-operation, for I repeat it, Sir, Breaches of the Law in question are only punishable by Action of Law. The Revenue, Sir, that can possibly arise from the licenses in this Territory is a very trifle, and in most cases they have been purchased for this year already. But if it is to be enforced, the decision of one Action against the Person suing for the penalty puts an end to it, and will lay the Collector open to much vexation, for, I suppose, suits would be instituted against him to recover back the Money for the Licenses by most of those who have already paid it. At the next meeting of Congress if it was their intention the tax should be levied here, they can put it beyond a doubt by extending the Law [relating to foreign spirits and licenses] expressly [to the Territory,] as was done with respect to the duties on domestic distilled spirits.13 I have &° Oliver Woolcot. [Endorsed] Copy to the Secretary of the Treasy July 24th 1795 « Aug. 9, 1793, ante, p. 458. 1S See also St. Clair to the Secretary of the Treasury, Dec. 3, 1795, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 378-383, written after the receipt of the copy of the Attorney General's opinion, which evidently came months later, probably in November, in a second letter from the Secretary of the Treasury. St. Clair's letter of Dec. 3, as printed in the Smith edition, is without date; the endorsement on the draft fixes the date.
Page 525
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 525 TREATY OF GREENVILLE [SD: Original Treaties 1*] [August 3, 1795] George Washington President of the United States of America.16 To all to whom these Presents shall come—Greeting. Whereas a Treaty of Peace and Friendship between the United States of America and the Tribes of Indians called the Wyandots, Delawares, Shawanoes, Ottawas, Chipewas, Putawatimes, Miamis, Eel River, Weea's, Kickapoos, Piankashaws, and Kaskaskias was made and concluded on the Third day of August one thousand seven hundred and ninety five by Anthony Wayne, Major General Com- manding the Army of the United States, duly authorized thereto, on the one part, and the Sachems and war Chiefs of the beforementioned Nations and Tribes of Indians whose names are thereunto signed on the other part; which Treaty is in the form and words following viz: A Treaty of Peace between the United States of America and the Tribes of Indians called the Wyandots, Delawares, Shawanoes, Ottawas, Chipewas, Putawatimes, Miamis, Eel River, Weea's, Kickapoos, Piankashaws and Kaskaskias.1* To put an end to a destructive War to settle all controversies and to restore harmony & a friendly intercourse between the said United States and Indian Tribes; Anthony Wayne Major General, com- manding the Army of the United States, & sole Commissioner for the good purposes above mentioned, and the said tribes of Indians, by their Sachems Chiefs, and Warriors met together at Greene Ville the Head Quarters of the said Army, have agreed on the following Articles; which, when ratified by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, shall be binding on them and the said Indian tribes. "Printed also in 7 Stat. 49-54; A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 562-563; Kappler (ed.), Treaties, II, 30-34. A comparison of the original treaty with the printed texts reveals numerous discrepancies; errors most frequently found relate to punc- tuation marks—an actual count in the case of the Statutes version, which is fol- lowed by Kappler, revealing more than one hundred changes. The original is rapidly fading, though still legible; a photostat copy has been made, however, which preserves the exact language of the text. 15 This instrument, dated Dec. 22, 1795, is stitched to the original treaty, the date conforming to that of the treaty ratification by the Senate (Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 197). A copy of the treaty was transmitted to the Senate for consid- eration on Dec. 9 (ibid., p. 193). 18 Extracts from despatches of Wayne to the Secretary of War, Nov. 5, Dec. 4 and 23, 1794, and Jan. 24, 1795, with enclosures of proceedings, are printed in A.S.P., Ind. Affairs, I, 547-549, 559-560. An extract of Wayne's letter of Aug. 9, 1795, announcing the completion of the negotiation, and the minutes of the pro- ceedings, June 16-August 10, are also printed ibid., pp. 564-583. The treaty was drafted by the Secretary of War in concert with the Secretary of State. Cf. the Secretary of War to Dandridge, Apr. 13, 1795, Pickering Papers (MHS).
Page 526
526 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Article 1flt Henceforth all hostilities shall cease; peace is hereby established, & shall be perpetual, and a friendly intercourse shall take place, between the said United States and Indian tribes. Article 2nd All prisoners shall on both sides be restored. The Indians, prisoners to the United States shall be immediately set at liberty. The people of the United States still remaining prisoners among the Indians shall be delivered up in Ninety days from the date hereof to the General or Commanding Officer at Greene Ville, Fort Wayne, or Fort Defiance, and ten Chiefs of the said tribes shall remain at Greene Ville as hostages, until the delivery of the prisoners shall be effected. Article 3rd The General boundary line between the lands of the United States, and the lands of the said Indian tribes, shall begin at the Mouth of Cayahoga River & run thence up the same to the portage between that and the Tuscarawas branch of the Muskingum, thence down that branch to the crossing place above Fort Lawrence, thence Westerly to a fork of that branch of the Great Miami River running into the Ohio, at or near which fork stood Loromies store, and where commences the portage between the Miami of the Ohio, & St Marys River, which is a branch of the Miami, which runs into Lake Erie, thence a westerly course to Fort Recovery, which stands on a branch of the Wabash, then South Westerly in a direct line to the Ohio, so as to intersect that river Opposite the Mouth of Kentucke or Cuttawa River. And in consideration of the peace now established, of the goods for- merly received from the United States,—of those now to be delivered, and of the yearly delivery of goods now stipulated to be made here- after; and to indemnify the United States for the injuries and expences they have sustained during the War; the said Indians tribes do hereby cede & relinquish forever, all their claims to the lands lying East- wardly and Southwardly of the general boundary line now described; and these lands, or any part of them, shall never hereafter be made a cause or pretence, on the part of the said Tribes or any of them, of War or injury to the United States, or any of the people thereof.17 And for the same considerations & as an evidence of the returning friendship of the said Indian tribes, of their confidence in the United States and desire to provide for their accommodation, and for that convenient intercourse which will be beneficial to both parties, the said Indian tribes do also Cede to the United States the following pieces of land; to wit. (1) one piece of land six Miles square at or near Loromies store beforementioned. (2) one piece two miles square at the head of the navigable water or landing on the St. Mary's 17 These were the first public lands (so-called "Congress" lands) to be surveyed under the act of May 18,1796, post, pp. 552. See Sherman, Original Ohio Land Subdivisions, pp. 107-130.
Page 527
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 527 River, near Girtys Town. (3) One piece six miles square at the head of the Navigable water of the Au Glaize River. (4) one piece six miles square at the confluence of the Au Glaize & Miami Rivers, where Fort Defiance now stands. (5) one piece six miles square at or near the confluence of the rivers Sl Mary's & Sl Joseph's, where fort Wayne now stands, or near it. (6) one piece two miles square on the Wabash River at the end of the portage from the Miami of the Lake and about eight miles westward from Fort Wayne. (7) one piece six miles square at the Ouatanon or old Wee'a Towns on the Wabash river. (8) One piece twelve Miles square at the British fort on the Miami of the Lake at the foot of the rapids. (9.) one piece six Miles square at the Mouth of the said River, where it empties into the Lake. (10) One piece six Miles square upon Sandusky Lake, where a Fort formerly stood. (11.) One piece two Miles square at the lower rapids of Sandusky River. (12) The Post of Detroit & all the land to the North the West and the South of it, of which, the Indian title has been extinguished by gifts or grants to the French or English Governments; and so much more land to be annexed to the district of Detroit as shall be comprehended between the River Rosine on the South, Lake St Clair on the North, and a line the general course whereof shall be six miles distant from the West end of Lake Eri, and Detroit River. (13) The Post of Michillimackinac, and all the land on the Island, on which that Post stands and the main land Adjacent of which the Indian title has been extinguished by Gifts or grants to the French or English Governments; and a piece of land on the Main to the North of the Island, to measure six miles on Lake Huron or the Streight between Lakes Huron & Michigan & to extend three miles back from the water of the Lake or streight, and also the Island de Bois Blanc being an extra and Voluntary gift of the Chipewa Nation. (14) One piece of land Six Miles Square at the mouth of Chikago River, emptying into the South West end of Lake Michigan, where a Fort Formerly stood. (15) One piece twelve miles square at or near the Mouth of the Illinois River, emptying into the Mississippi. (16) One piece six miles square at the old Piorias Fort & Village, near the South end of the Illinois Lake on said Illinois river. And whenever the United States shall think proper to survey and mark the bounda- ries of the lands hereby Ceded to them, they shall give timely notice thereof to the said Tribes of Indians, that they may appoint some of their wise chiefs to attend and see that the lines are run according to the terms of this treaty. And the said Indian tribes will allow to the people of the United States a free passage by land and by Water, as one and the other shall be found Convenient, thro' their Country, along the chain of Posts herein before mentioned; that is to say, from the commencement of the portage aforesaid at or near Loromies store, thence along said
Page 528
528 TERRITORIAL PAPERS portage to the Sl Mary's and down the same to Fort Wayne, and then down the Miami to Lake Erie.—again from the commencement of the portage at or near Loromies store along the portage from thence to the river Au-Glaize, and down the same to its junction with the Miami at Fort Defiance.—again from the commencement of the portage aforesaid, to Sandusky River and down the same to San- dusky bay & Lake Erie, & from Sandusky to the post which shall be taken at or near the foot of the rapids of the Miami of the Lake; and from thence to Detroit. Again from the mouth of Chikago, to the Commencement of the portage, between that River & the Illinoi's, & down the Illinois River to the Mississippi—also from Fort Wayne along the portage aforesaid which leads to the Wabash, and then down the Wabash to the Ohio. And the said Indian tribes will also allow to the people of the United States the free use of the harbours and mouths of Rivers along the Lakes adjoining the Indian lands, for sheltering Vessells and boats, & liberty to land their cargoes where necessary for their safety. Article 4th In consideration of the peace now established, and of the cessions and relinquishments of lands made in the preceeding Article by the said tribes of Indians, & to manifest the liberality of the United States, as the great means of rendering this peace strong and perpetual; the United States relinquish their claims to all other Indian lands Northward of the river Ohio, eastward of the Mississippi and westward & southward of the great Lakes & the waters Uniting them; according to the boundary line Agreed on by the United States & the King of Great Britain, in the treaty of peace made between them in the Year 1783. But from this relinquishment by the United States, the following tracts of land, are explicitly excepted. 1" The Tract of One hundred and fifty thousand Acres near the rapids of the river Ohio, which has been Assigned to General Clark, for the use of himself and his Warriors. 2d The post of Sl Vincennes on the river Wabash, & the lands adjacent; of which the Indian title has been extinguished. 3d The lands at all other places in possession of the French people & other white Settlers Among them, of which the Indian title has been extinguished as mentioned in the 3d Article; And 4th The Post of Fort Massac towards the mouth of the Ohio. To which several parcels of land so excepted the said tribes relinquish all the title and Claim which they or any of them may have. And for the same considerations & with the same Views, as above mentioned, the United States now deliver to the said Indian tribes a quantity of goods to the value of Twenty thousand Dollars, the receipt whereof they do hereby Acknowledge and henceforward every year forever the United States will deliver at some convenient place northward of the river Ohio, like useful goods, suited to the Circum- stances of the Indians of the Value of Nine Thousand five hundred
Page 529
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 529 Dollars; reckoning that value at the first cost of the Goods in the City or place in the United States, where they shall be procured. The tribes to which those goods are to be annually delivered, and the proportions in which they are to be delivered, are the following. V* To the Wyandots, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 2d To the Delawares, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 3d To the Shawanoes, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 4th To the Miamis, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 5th To the Ottawas, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 6th To the Chipewas, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 7th To the Putawatimes, the amount of One thousand Dollars. 8th And to the Kickapoo, Weea, Eel river, Piankashaw and Kaskaskias tribes, the amount of Five hundred Dollars each. Provided, That if either of the said tribes shall hereafter at an Annual delivery of their share of the goods aforesaid, desire that a part of their annuity should be furnished in domestic animals, implements of husbandry and other Utensils convenient for them, & in compen- sation to useful Artificers who may reside with or near them, & be employed for their benefit, the same shall at the Subsequent Annual deliverys be furnished accordingly. Article 5th To prevent any misunderstanding about the Indian lands relinquished by the United States in the fourth Article, it is now explicitly declared that the meaning of that relinquishment is this. The Indian tribes who have a right to those lands are quietly to enjoy them, hunting, planting, and dwelling thereon so long as they please, without any molestation from the United States: but when those tribes or any of them shall be disposed to sell their lands or any part of them, they are to be sold only to the United States.—and untill such sale the United States will protect all the said Indian tribes in the quiet enjoyment of their lands against all Citizens of the United States, and against all other white persons who intrude upon the same. And the said Indian tribes again acknowledge themselves to be under the protection of the said United States, and no other power whatever. Article 6th If any Citizen of the United States or any other white person or persons shall presume to settle upon the lands now relin- quished by the United States, such Citizen or other person shall be out of the protection of the United States, and the Indian tribe on whose land the Settlement shall be made, may drive off the Settler, or punish him in such manner as they shall think fit and because such settlements made without the consent of the United States, will be injurious to them, as well as to the Indians; the United States shall be at liberty to break them up & remove and punish the Settlers as they shall think proper, and so effect that protection of the Indians lands herein before stipulated. 128650—34 36
Page 530
530 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Article 7th The said tribes of Indians, parties to this Treaty shall be at liberty to hunt within the territory and lands which they have now ceded to the United States without hindrance or molestation so long as they demean themselves peaceably, and offer no injury to the people of the United States. Article 8th Trade shall be opened with the said Indian tribes;18 and they do hereby respectively engage to afford protection to such persons with their property as shall be duly licensed to reside among them for the purpose of trade & to their Agents & Servants; but no person shall be permitted to reside at any of their towns or hunting Camps as a trader, who is not furnished with a license for that purpose under the hand and seal of the superintendant of the Department Northwest of the Ohio, or such other person as the President of the United States shall authorise to grant such licences; to the end that the said Indians may not be imposed on in their trade. and if any licensed trader shall abuse his privilege by unfair dealing, upon complaint and proof there- of his licence Shall be taken from him; and he shall be further punished according to the laws of the United States. And if any person shall intrude himself as a trader without such license the said Indians shall take and bring him before the Superintendant or his Deputy to be dealt with according to law. And to prevent impositions by forged licences, the said Indians shall at least once a year give information to the Superintendant or his deputies of the names of the traders residing among them.19 Article 9th Lest the firm peace and friendship now established should be interrupted by the misconduct of individuals, the United States, and the said Indian tribes agree, that for injuries done by indi- viduals on either side, no private revenge or retaliation shall take place; but instead thereof, complaint shall be made by the party injured to the other; by the said Indian tribes or any of them to the President of the United States or the Superintendant by him Appointed; and by the Superintendant or other person appointed by the President to the principal chiefs of the said Indian tribes, or of the tribe to which the Offender belongs; and such prudent Measures shall then be pursued as shall be necessary to preserve the said peace & friendship unbroken, until the legislature (or Great Council) of the United States shall make Other equitable provision in the Case, to the Satisfaction of both parties. Should any Indian tribes meditate a War against the United States or either of them, and the same shall come to the knowledge of the before mentioned tribes or 18 See act to regulate trade with the Indians, May 19, 1796, 1 Stat. 469-474. 18 The possible contravention of the third article of the Jay treaty (Miller, ed., Treaties, 2:246) was raised in connection with the foregoing section. An ex- planatory article to the Jay treaty was negotiated and ratified in 1796; the text is printed ibid., pp. 346-347.
Page 531
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 531 either of them, they do hereby engage to give immediate notice thereof to the General or Officer Commanding the troops of the United States at the nearest post. And should any tribe with hostile intentions against the United States or either of them attempt to pass thro' their Country, they will endeavour to prevent the same, and in like manner give information of such attempt, to the General or Officer Command- ing, as soon as possible, that all causes of Mistrust and Suspicion may be avoided between them and the United States: in like manner the United States shall give notice to the said Indian tribes of any harm that may be meditated against them, or either of them, that shall come to their knowledge: and do all in their power to hinder and prevent the same; that the Friendship between them may be Uninterrupted. Article 10th All other Treaties heretofore made between the United States and the said Indian tribes, or any of them since the treaty of 1783 between the United States, and Great Britain, that come within the Purview of this treaty, shall henceforth cease and become Void. In Testimony whereof the said Anthony Wayne, and the Sachems and War Chiefs of the before mentioned nations and tribes of Indians have hereunto set their hands and Affixed their seals. Done at Greene Ville in the Territory of the United States north west of the River Ohio on the third day of August One Thousand Seven Hundred & Ninety five. Anthony Wayne [l.s.] bu-kon-ge-he-las [L.s.] Pee-kee-lund [L.S.] Welle-baw-kee-lund [L.S.] Pee-kee-tele-mund [L.S.] (or Thomas Adams) KlSH-KO-pE-KUND [L.S.] (or Captain Buffaloe) Ame-na-he-han [L.s.] (or Captain Crow.) Que-Shawk-sey. [L.s.] (or George Washington) Wey-Win-quis [l.s.] (or Billy Siscomb.) Moses GO cr p 3 5 Q MlS-QUA-COO-nA-CAW (or red pole) Cut-the-we-ka-saw (or black hoof) Kay-se-wa-e-se-kah- Wey-tha-pa-mat-tha- NlA-NYM-SE-KA Way-the-ah (or long Shanks) Wey-a-pier-sen-waw (or blue Jacket) [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] O 5T 19« Each Indian signature is accom- panied by a distinctive symbol, which it has not seemed necessary to reproduce. a. r 9* Sha-tey-ya-ron-yah. [L.s.] (or leather lips) Daugh-Shut-tay-ah [L.s.] Sha-aw-run-the [L.s.]
Page 532
532 TERRITORIAL PAPERS a 5L so 3* p 3 . a o P 3 W at 3* CD* p ss 3 IT 3 cr| Si i W0 CO rj CD O B.» 01 go Teta-boksh-ke. [L.S.] (or Grand Glaize King Le-man-tan-quis. [L.S.] (or black King) Wa-bat-thoe [L.S.] Magh-pi-way.— [L.S.] (or red feather) KlK-THA-WE-NUND [L.S.] (or Anderson) Tar-he (or Crane) I Williams Junr Tey-yagh-taw Ha-r6-en-you (or half Kings son. Te-haaw-to-rens aw-me-yee-ray Staye-tah Pee-jee-wA (or Richardville) COCH-KE-pOGH-TOGH. (Eel river tribe) Sha-me-kun-ne-sa. (or Soldier) (miamis) Wa-pa-man-gwa. (or the white loon) A-MA-CUN-SA. (or little beaver.) A-COO-LA-THA. (or little fox) Francis. Kee-aw-hah Ne-migh-ka (or Jose Renard) Pai kee-ka-nogh [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.1 [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] [L.S.] if as, il ! So sr 3 O co If? "(TJ s i I 3 » Haw-kin-pum-is-ka [L.S.] Pey-a-mawk-sey [L.S.] Reyn-tue-co [L.S.] (of the Six Nations living at Sandusky) Me-she-ge-the-nogh [L.S.] (for himself and brother Wa-wa-sek) Hln-GO-SWASH [L.S.] A-NE-WA-SAW [L.S.] NAW-BUDGH [L.S.] MlS-SE-NO-GO-MAW [L.S.] WA-WE-EG-SHE [L.S.] THAW-ME [L.S.] (or Le Blanc) GEE-QUE-(for himself [L.S.] and, brother—She-win-se O-KI-A [L.S.] CHA-MUNG [L.S.] SE-GA-GE-WAN. [L.S.] Na-naw-me (for him- [L.s.] self and Brother A-gin-) Mar-chand [L.S.] We-na-me-ac. [L.S.] Na-goh-quan-gogh [L.S.] (or Le Gris.) Me-She-kun-nogh- [L.S.] QUOH. (or little Turtle) [L.S.] Mee-ne-doh-gee- [L.S.] Chipaw SOGH Pee-wan-she-me- [L.S.] NOGH co" Wey-me-gwas [L.S.] [L.S.] GOb-MO-A-TICK [L.S.] [L.S.] o Che-go-nick-ska [L.S.] [L.S.] % (an Ottawa- -from Sandusky)
Page 533
NORTHWEST 533 TERRITORY Thu-pe-ne-bu [L.S.] AU-GOOSH-AWAY. [L.S.] f Naw-ac. for himself [L.S.] Q Kee-no-sha-meek [L.S.] p and brother At-si-me-the\ FJ La Malice. [L.S.] 3 Ne-nan-se-ka [L.S.] .wa's Ma-chi-we-tah [L.S.] CD. Kee-sass. (or Sun) [L.S.] Tho-wo-na-wa. [L.S.] Ka-ba-ma-saw- [L.S.] Se-Caw [L.S.] r (for himself & brother (»' cr Chi-sau-gan) Mash-i-pi-nash-i-wish [L.S.] W SUG-GA-NUNK. [L.S.] (or bad bird) liver! Wap-me-me [L.S.] Nah-sho-ga-She. (from Lake superior) [L.S.] (or white pigeon) O E Wa-che-ness. (for [L.S.] S£ Ka-tha-wa-sung [L.S.] 3 himself and brother i' Ma-sass. [L.S.] 0r Pe-da-go-shok 1 Ne-me-kass. [L.S.] i o Wab-shi-caw-naw [L.S.] (or little Thunder) p* La-Chasse. [L.S.] Pe-shaw-kay. (or young ox [L.S.] CO Nan-guey [L.S.] lawai Ne-que-taugh-aw. [L.S.] Hah-goo-see-kaw. [L.S.] nre's (or Captain Reed.) In presence of (The word "goods" in the 6th line of the 3d Article; the word "before" in the 26th line of the 3d Article; the words "five hundred" in the 10th line of the 4th Article, and the word "Pianke- shaw" in the 14th line of the 4th Article being first interlined.). H. De Butts 20 first A.D.C. & secy to M. G. Wayne Wm H. Harrison Aid de Camp to M. G. Wayne. T. Lewis 21 Aid de Camp to M. G. Wayne. James 0' Hara Quarter Master Gen1 John Mills,22 Major of Infantry & Adjt Gen1 Caleb Swan 23 P.M.T.U.S. Geo. Demler 24 Lieut Artillery. Vigo25 P. Frs. La Fontaine 29 20 Henry De Butts, captain U.S. Infantry, 1792-1797; resigned from the serv- ice, 1797 (Heitman, Hist. Reg. U.S. Army, I, 363-364). » Thomas Lewis, captain U.S. Infantry, 1792; resigned 1801, ibid., p. 631. n Adjutant and inspector of the Army from 1794 to 1796; died July 8, 1796, ibid., p. 713. » Appointed paymaster U. S. Army, 1792; resigned June 30, 1808, ibid., p. 938. - Appointed captain U. S. Army, 1795, f6i<f., p. 366. u Francis Vigo. *• Francis Lafontaine, fur trader, for whom see Quaife (ed.), Askin Papers, (BHR, I), 269.
Page 534
534 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ANT. LASSELLE.27 H Laselle. Jn. Beau Bien.28 David Jones Chaplain U.S.A. Lewis Beufait.29 r. lachambre.30 F. Pepin 31 Baties Coutien.32 F. Navarre.33 Wm. Wells34 Jacques Lasselle. M. Morins Bt. Sans Crainte.35 Christopher Miller. Robert Willson. Abraham X Williams, Isaac X Zane GO r 3 9 .3 3 NOW KNOW YE, That I having seen and considered the said Treaty do by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate of the United States, accept, Ratify, and Confirm the same, and every article and clause thereof. In Testimony whereof I have caused the Seal of the [L.s.] United States to be hereunto affixed and signed the same with my hand. Given at the City of Philadelphia the Twenty second day of December, in the year of our Lord one thou- sand seven hundred and ninety five, and in the Twentieth year of the Sovereignty and Independence of the United States.36 By the President G° Washington Timothy Pickering. "Antoine Lacelle was a brother of Jacques, interpreter at the treaty. Hyacinthe was a son of the latter. For an account of family of, see ibid., pp. 197, 366. The family were engaged in the western trade (upper Canada and on the Maumee) and were partisans of the Indians prior to the battle of Fallen Timbers. 28 Jean Baptiste Cuillerier dit Barrois, ibid., II, 683. 29 Louis Beaufit, prominent in the early American period in Detroit, as justice of the peace, judge of common pleas and as an officer in the militia, ibid., I, 518. 30 For activities as an early partisan of the American cause in the Indian war, see Mich. Hist. Colls., XII, 169, 171. 31 Francis Pepin, sent as an emissary by Wayne to persuade the Indians to assemble at the Greenville conference, ibid., p. 171. 32 Uncertain reading. 33 Probably Francois Navarre; see Mich. Hist. Colls., XII, 171. 34 Noted Indian interpreter, son-in-law of Little Turtle. 35 Jean Baptiste Romain dit Sans Crainte (Quaife, ed., Askin Papers, BHR, I, 234), an emissary of Wayne (Mich. Hist. Colls., XII, 171). 36 Stitched to the end of the original treaty.
Page 535
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 535 [Endorsed] Treaty with the Wyandots, Delawares Shawanoes, Ottawas, &c—concluded by General Wayne 3 Augt 179537 Treaty by General Wayne with the Indians N. W. of Ohio GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C] Cincinnati, Aug. 24th, 1795 Sir The Ordinance for the Government of this Territory requires that the Governor and Judges shall, from time to time,—report to Congress the Laws by them adopted and published. Since the new organization of the General Government there has been no mode pointed out for those communicating directly with Congress, and they have conceived that the communication which went formerly through the Secretary of Congress must now go through the Secretary of State, and in consequence, you are troubled with two lists of the Laws, adopted at a session of the Legislature which closed this day,38 one for the Senate and one for the House of representatives, which they request may be laid before them at the next meeting of Congress. Should they have mistaken the proper Channel, will you be pleased, Sir, to direct them to the right one, which will save a like trouble in future. The act of Congress entitled An act respecting the Government of the Territories, passed 1" May 179239 directs that the Laws of the Territories, shall be printed under the direction of the Secretary of State, and two hundred copies to be delivered to the Governor to be distributed. The legislature have found that they can be printed here, which will not only put them sooner into the hands of the People, but diffuse the knowledge of them more generally, and have with these views contracted for printing those of the last Session; but, at the same time that called up an Expectation to the printer that he might possibly receive from the General Government the sum which printing 200 Copies would have cost in Philadelphia. Should the \ Measure meet your approbation, it will be very obliging if you will please to put it in train. The same Act directs the Secretary of State to provide proper Seals for the respective public Officers. When Mr. Jefferson was about that Business, the Recorders Office was some how omitted, and that Office is without a seal in all the counties which are at present four in 37 A copy of the treaty was received at Detroit in September and forwarded to Lord Dorchester under cover of a letter from McKee, Sept. 4, 1795 {Mich. Hist. Colls., XII, 176-177). "Thirty-eight laws, printed in Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvn), 131-288. 39 Approved May 8, ante, p. 395.
Page 536
536 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Number, and this session an Orphans Court has been erected, which will make the number of Seals wanted amount to eight, two for each County. With the Seals Mr. Jefferson forwarded Presses. The Device of all offices the same, and they differ only by the Inscription, and I have the liberty to inclose an impression of one of them. I have the honor &° To the HOnshl Edmund Randolp[h] Secretary of State [Endorsed] Copy to honhl Edmund Randolp[h] Secretary of State Aug. 24th 1795 THE POSTMASTER GENERAL40 TO JUDGE TURNER [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] G.P.O. Sept 7. 1795. George Turner Esqre Sir, Mr Maxwell41 is appointed to succeed the late Mr Dunn42 in the Post Office at Cincinnati who I have no doubt will do very well as honesty is a very good ingredient & with some knowledge of business will make a good Postmaster—The profits of these appointments being seldom such as to make them an object they too often fall to the lot of those who are not qualified for them.—It is an office however of im- portance not only to the government but to the Citizens: this consider- ation will often induce a good man to accept it merely with a view of serving his neighbors & promoting an establishment of such general utility.—Mr John G. M'Dowell is the Contractor from Graham's station to Cincinnati; I find by his Contract that he is to arrive at that place on Monday by 12 O'Clock & is not to leave it till the next morning which is giving sufficient time for the inhabitants of Cincin- nati to answer their letters if Mr M'Dowell would conform to his engagement, I shall write to him & urge a punctual compliance with it. Mr Maxwell shall be informed of the hours of the arrival & departure of the Mail whose duty it is to note every failure of the Contractor.—I am told that the present route by the Ohio must be altered for a few months in the Winter while the passage of it is obstructed by the ice & that thro' the Wilderness resumed; when this happens I will allow as much time for the Mail to remain at Cincinnati as will be consistent with that dispatch & general accommodation which is required in such arrangements.—Whenever you can make it convenient I hope to be favored with a line from you every information respecting the 40 Joseph Habersham, of Georgia, appointed Feb. 25, 1795, in succession to Pickering. 41 William Maxwell, in 1793 founder of the first newspaper in the territory, the Centinel of the North-Western Territory, and in 1796 publisher of Maxwell's Code, embodying the laws of the territory. 4» Abner M. Dunn.
Page 537
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 537 business of this Department will be thankfully received & particularly attended to.43— J. H. THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers :ALS] War Office Sept. 28.1795. Sir, I have in some measure anticipated your wishes of information relative to General Wayne's treaty:44 and now have the pleasure to inclose a copy45 received yesterday evening, with an extract from his letter of the 9th ult°49 being all that he says on the subject. He has obtained more land than was expected. The chiefs who signed the treaty are not numerous: but I observe among them the names of Blue Jacket, the great Warrior of the Shawanoes, & of Misqua-coo- na-caw their great Speaker—of Buckongelas the Great Warrior of the Delawares—and of Au-goo-sha way the Ottawa whose name I recollect to have heard Col° Butler mention with much respect when I was in Canada. I am not acquainted with the names of important Chiefs of the other tribes. With the greatest respect I am, Sir, your obl servt Timothy Pickering The President of the U. States [Endorsed] The Secretary of War 28th Sep. 1795 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers: AL] War Office Octr 2.1795. Sir Yesterday I was honoured with your letter of the 28th ult° In my letter of last Monday47 I inclosed the copy of the treaty made by General Wayne and an extract of every thing relating to it from his letter of the 9th of August. The messenger who brought it was a discharged sergeant of dragoons, who did not leave Greenville till the 26th (or thereabout) and who brought letters to some people dated at Fort Washington on the 28th—In my letter of the 28th I 45 Cf. the Postmaster General to Putnam, Mar. 25, 1795, aide, p. 508, and to De Hebecourt and others, Nov. 16 and 17, 1795, post, pp. 539-542. 44 In answer to the President's letters of Sept. 23 and 25; see Pickering Papers (MHS). « Of Aug. 3, 1795, ante, p. 525. 41 Extract in Washington Papers (LC); copy in Wayne Papers (HSP), vol. xni; see also the Secretary of War to the President, Sept. 11 and 21, 1795, Pickering Papers (MHS). 47 Sept. 28.
Page 538
538 TERRITORIAL PAPERS mentioned what I recollected of the characters of the Chiefs who signed the treaty; and altho' a letter lately received from Mr Chapin48 mentions information received from Capt. Brant containing intima- tions that the tribes were not fully represented, yet if we obtain next year the western posts, I presume there will be no danger of a recom- mencement of hostilities. The news-papers have mentioned the desertion of four sailors from the British vessels at Detroit. Three of them have called upon me. Two I knew—they were sailors on board the Dunmore, in which the Commissioners passed Lake Erie in 1793.—They say the inhabitants in general at Detroit are well satisfied with the expected transfer of that place to the jurisdiction of the U. States. That Col° England (who commands at Detroit) has been examining the ground on the opposite side of the strait, and thought of erecting a post there about a mile & a half below that at Detroit. All their information showed that the inhabitants & troops in that country were in full expectation of a surrender of the posts according to the treaty. Mr Chapin in his letter of the 9th ult° mentions that Col" McKee had been down to Montreal; and that in future this was to be the place of his residence. This doubtless is a circumstance, which if true, will be favourable to the continuance of peace at the Westward.—The sailors told me that Simon Girty, the common interpreter for the Western Indians, in the pay of the British, had been dismissed. Govr Simcoe has lately been in council with the Six Nations:" but according to Mr Chapin's information, merely in a friendly way, without any particular object of business. I am with the highest respect, Sir, your most obt servt Timothy Pickering The President of the U. States. P. S. The transportation of provisions from the Ohio to Greenville so prodigiously enhances the price, I shall by to-morrow's post write General Wayne, & propose his removing a considerable portion of the troops to the banks of the Ohio. The only difficulty that occurs to me is this—that it will oblige them to erect a new set of huts for the winter: but as they may probably place themselves in a forest, the convenience of getting fuel for the winter may perhaps counter balance the labour of hutting. Should he adopt the measure, he will leave such a force as he shall think necessary to reinforce any of the detached posts, & prevent the Indians entertaining any improper ideas that might lead to a violation of the peace.—I hope this sugges- 48 Not found. For proceedings of Governor Simcoe with the Six Nations at Fort Erie, Aug. 28, 1795, see Cruikshank (ed.), Simcoe Papers, IV, 83-88.
Page 539
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 539 tion will meet your approbation. The lateness of the season induces me to write immediately. T. P. [Endorsed] From The Secy of War 2d Oct 1795 THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR [LC: Washington Papers: D] [October 7, 1795] To—The Secretary of War Sir Your communications of the 2d Inst have been duly received. General Wayne will, I hope & expect, leave the Garrisons in his advanced Posts sufficiently respectable.—In the present uncertainty of what may be the final result of the treaty with Great Britain, and from the intimations of Capt" Brant, we ought not in my opinion to ceconomise at too Great a hazard;—nor build too much in the present moment, on the treaty of peace with the Western Indians. Mount Vernon 7th Oct 1795 G Washington [Endorsed] To The Secy of War 7th Oct. 1795 THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO FRANCIS DE HEBECOURT 60 [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] G.P.O. Novemr 16th 1795 Francis De Hebecourt Sir Your Letters of the 8th and 20th of October61 have been duly received, in the former you inform me that the Mail Boat N° 3 had not arrived in time at Grahams Station for one week only, owing to a great fresh in the river; and in the latter you say that there are no Mails due now, and that the former regularity has taken place, from which if I had received no other representations I should conclude that the Mail had been carried except in one Instance, with great regularity to Kentucky, and the North Western territory. I have however received Letters from Mr Graham and the Contrac- tor Mr Graham says that the irregularity complained of at Cincinnati is not the fault of the Contractor, but that it is occasioned by the Boat N° 3. which more frequently arrives on Saturday than on Thurs- day the proper day. The Contractor also informs me that he is 50 Postmaster at Gallipolis; his bond was forwarded to the Postmaster General by Putnam, Aug. 30, 1794 (Buell, ed., Memoirs Putnam, p. 392). 51 Not found.
Page 540
540 TERRITORIAL PAPERS detained at Grahams Station commonly until Saturday Noon which obliges him to hurry from Cincinnati. The Mail should be delivered on Thursday 10. a m under your regulations at Preston by the Boat N° 3, and the rider should agreeable to his Contract leave it on Friday Morning at 10 0 Clock, but if he does not get the Mail before Saturday noon he cannot return before Friday which deranges the whole busi- ness. Upon your representations you were allowed to employ an other hand for Boat N° 3 as she had a greater distance to perform than the other Boats to place her upon a footing with them, this you assured me would ensure the greatest punctuality but, to put it beyond the reach of accident;—24 hours are allowed from the time stipulated for the arrival of that Boat at Grahams Station, before the Mail leaves it for Cincinnati. I am sorry to have occasion to observe that the representation you have made on this subject is not a candid one. The Mails down the Ohio are carried at a very great expence which is not an object if the Government as well as the Citizens can thereby ensure a regular communication with the Army and State of Kentucky and in my letter of the 18. of July I requested you to give me every information of failures on that route, and of the cause of them, and tho' it appears that they have been frequent, your Letter of the 8th Octr is the only one I have received from you on that subject. I hope that the Mails under your direction in the Boats will be conducted with more regularity than they have been and that I shall hear of no more failures from that quarter Mr Burral is sick who Settles the Accounts of the office I therefore cannot answer that part of your Letter which respects your accounts.62 J.H THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO GEORGE GRAHAM63 [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. D] [Post Office Department] November 16.1795 George Graham Esqr Your Letter of the 10 October64 has been duly received and I thank you for the information it contains respecting the delays of the Mail in its transportation on the river My Letter to Mc Dowel was written on a presumption that the Mail was regularly delivered to him on Friday morning conformably to his Schedule, this however I am sorry to find has not been the case, and if it had not been for your representations as well as those of the Contractor from Preston to Cincinnati I should 5» See also the Postmaster General to Turner, Sept. 7, 1795, ante, p. 536. 43 Postmaster at Preston, Kentucky; see Putnam to the Postmaster General, Jan. 16,1795, Buell (ed.), op. ext., pp. 395-397. - Not found.
Page 541
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 541 not have known to the contrary. Mr De Hebecourt was here in July when I was led to believe that an additional hand in Boat N° 3 would place her on a footing with the other Boats and ensure punctuality in the carriage of the Mail, as that Boat has a greater distance to perform than the others—This I readily consented to, and as Mr De Hebecourt had the direction of the Boats, I desired him to inform me of any failures, and the cause of them, as it was a matter of the greatest importance that there should be a regular communication preserved not only with the Army but also the State of Kentucky. My Letter to Mr De Hebecourt was dated in July since which I have received two from him dated the 8th and 21" of the last month in the former he mentions only a single failure occasioned by a great fresh and in the other Letter he says that there is no Mail due now and all the former regularity has taken place I am much chagrined to find that the trans- portation of the Mail on the Ohio has been conducted so irregularly as from the representations of Mr De Hebecourt I was confident that the additional hand in the Boat from Gallipolis to Preston with the delay of 24 hours between the arrival and departure of the Mail for cincin- nati had secured punctuality in the carrying of it beyound the reach of common accidents You will find from Mr Burrals Letter to you of the 7th instant that he has desired you to draw on him for the Pay of the Contractor between Grahams Station and Cincinnati; however as you may be in want of some Money for present purposes I have for- warded by this post to the Post Master at Washington One Hundred and Eighty two Dollars and fifty two cents in Bank Post Bills—the fate of the last Bills remitted you has induced me to send them in this manner and I hope those will meet with a more safe conveyance than the others did. The Post Master will deliver them to your order— I have written by this Conveyance to Mr De Hebecourt respecting the carriage of the Mails, and expect to hear of no more failures as in that quarter in future I hope it will be delivered in time to Mc Dowel Your Brother has not yet called but when he does I shall make him the payment you desired JH THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JOHN G. McDOWEL [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. D] [Post Office Department] November 17.1795. John G. M°Dowel I have received your Letter of the 3d of October in answer to mine of the 9th Septemr M and am satisfied that you have been obliged to leave Cincinnati, in a shorter time than is Stipulated in your Contract, from Neither of these letters has been found.
Page 542
542 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the delay in delivering the Mail at Preston by the Boat which carried it from Gallipolis to that place. My Letter was written on a presumption that the mail was regu- larly delivered at Grahams Station, as I had every assurance from Mr. De Hebecourt, who conducts that part of the business, of the greatest punctuality, and I allowed him in July last to employ an additional hand in the Boat between Grahams Station and Gallipolis which he said would ensure it. It was certainly better for you to wait for the Mail from this place if you could not remain more than two or three hours at Cincinnati than to proceed without it. I have written to Mr De Hebecourt on this subject and I hope the business under his direction will in future be conducted with more regularity; at any rate I would not wish you to go without the mail but I expect you will not hereafter have to wait for it. I have enclosed one hundred and Eighty two Dollars and fifty cents to Mr Harris the Post Master at Washington who is directed to pay them to you. In future perhaps it may be convenient for Mr Graham to draw on this office and his Draft shall be punctually paid. Money was sent for the purpose of paying you but Mr Graham did not receive the Letter in which it was inclosed56 J. H. GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OSL:St. Clair Papers :C"] [January—1796] Sir On the 4th of May68 last I informed the late Secretary of State that some confusion in the western Counties of this Territory occa- sioned, in some measure by some interferences of the Judicial with the executive authority which appeared to me to be improper would oblige me to visit that Country. Soon afterward I received information from General Wayne that after the Armistice had taken place, a number of Indians peaceably following their occupation of Hunting had been killed in that Country and about the same time I was informed of two Peotewatamies, in the Custody of the Sheriff, having been murdered there.69 As Judge Turner was in that part of the Country when the Murder was perpetrated, I applied to him to be certified of the Cir- S8 See the Postmaster General to de Hebecourt, Jan. 6, 1796, post, p. 549. "Printed also with variations, in Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 396-403. The present text is based on a contemporary copy in the St. Clair Papers (OSL); the enclosures mentioned in the letter and the original letter have not been located. 48 Ante, p. 515. M See Sargent to the Justices of the Peace in St. Clair County, Apr. 21, 1795, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 433; St. Clair to William St. Clair, June 3, 1795, St. Clair Papers (OSL).
Page 543
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 543 cumstances and whether he had taken any, and what steps to bring the Offenders to Justice in answer to which I received the Letter marked N° 1.60 and his communication with the sheriff on that subject, upon which was issued a Proclamation 61 requiring them to be appre- hended. The Legislature was at that time in session and it was not until the 29th of August that I was able to leave Cincinnati in company with Judge Symmes, a Court was held at Kaskaskia as soon as possible after his arrival there, where the most positive testimony as adduced to the Grand Jury against two Persons, inhabitants of the County of St Clair, that the Murder was committed by them, but no Bill was was found against them. The Court then adjourned to Cahokia, another Town in the same County when, at my request the matter was again brought before the Grand Jury in a very pathetic Charge from the Judge, and I directed the Persons prosecuting the public Pleas to send a Bill for Murder against the two Persons who had been before sworn to as the Perpetrators, but it was returned another was then sent up for Man slaughter which was returned in the same way and produced the Presentment marked N° 4—62 From the Enquiries I made into the Affair of the Indians killed at their hunting-Camp, I found the Circumstances to be not only not blameable but laudable. The Nation they belonged to had been at open War, and committed great depredations and many Murders, and some of them very re- cently, in that Country, and neither the Indians nor the People had received any account of a Cessation of Hostilities having taken place, the People at least had not, and they had received Intelligence that the Settlement would be attacked by them the next morning, I am sorry however to add that, had the Affair been ever so criminal in its nature, it would have been, I believe, impossible to have brought the Actors to punishment. The difficulties that have occurred in cases of that Nature in various parts of the united States, as well as in this Territory, and the stain it fixes on the national Character has often led me to consider whether Justice could not be secured to the Indians by adding some sanction to the Law beyond what is usual between the Citizens, and it has occurred to me that, were a pretty heavy Pecuniary fine to be set upon the Murder of an Indian, and a propor- tional one for lesser Injuries, to be levied upon the Counties where the Offense was committed if the Offenders were not brought to Justice, it would probably have the Effect, for it is often seen that the Minds of Men little tinctured with Justice or humanity have a pretty strong sympathy with their Pockets, and I believe it to be a Subject within the province of the General Legislature. 60 Not found. "June 1, 1795, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 436. •» Not found.
Page 544
544 TERRITORIAL PAPERS My Letter of the 4th May last63 contained extracts from Letters of Judge Turner to me respecting some Services that had been made by his Authority, and complaints against some County officers particu- larly Mr Vanderburgh the Judge of Probate for the County of Knox,64 and of my Answer to him on those Subjects of the 14th Decr last.65 The Case against Goods that had been seized on the Wabash was dismissed by Judge Symmes and the Goods restored, and in the case of that against those that were seized on the Ohio, and sent to Kas- kaskia, and there condemned and sold, a Writ of Error has been brought and the Condemnation will probably be reversed, and indeed if goods transporting on the navigable Rivers from one part of the Territory to the other are liable to seizure because thay may be goods usually vended to Indians, those rivers would be useless to the inhab- itants and no Person who might venture to use them safe from the practice of common informers. It gives me pain, however that the Secretary of State should ever have been troubled with Complaints about County Officers, to the punishing their mal conduct the Court and the power of the Govr are unquestionably competent, but as com- plaints also against the Judge were involved in them, it became neces- sary for me to send them forward. The Parties have made their respective representations, and were inclosed in my Letter of the 25 Augt66 and an official Copy of the transaction of Mr Vanderburgh in the Circuit Court complained of is containd in N° 5 67 When I went to the Illinois Country in 1789 I was directed to enquire into and confirm in their Possessions and Titles the Ancient Inhabitants and others settled there on or before the Year 1783 68 All the Titles that were presented were examined and so far as they were forwarded directed to be surveyed that specific confirmations might issue but on the late occasion, I found that many just claims had not been brought forward and as there was no limitation by Law as to the time of their being presented I conceived myself obliged to receive them and to direct the survey to be made as before—Grants of Land to a very considerable amount had been made by officers of the State of Virginia, and by the Courts of the Country after the Cession to the united States wholly unauthorized by Law—Those I conceive myself obliged to reject and accordingly did reject them in toto; but a Law of the united States has given some validity to those 10 Ante, p. 515. M June 14, 1794, St. Clair Papers (OSL) and Nov. 25, 1794, not found. The latter contained enclosures, Nov. 4, 5, and 15, 1794, which are among the St. Clair Papers. M Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 330-332. See also St. Clair to the Secretary of State, July 18, 1795, ante, p. 522. •« St. Clair Papers (OSL). "Not found. 88 See report of St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1791, ante, p. 323.
Page 545
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 545 grants where actual Improvement has followed, leaving it however discretionary with the Govr to grant any quantity of Land not exceed- ing two hundred Acres to each holder of such Grant, and so in pro- portion to the nature of the Improvement. It became my Duty to take these grants into Consideration and I have received and regis- tered all that were presented for the first time, as well as those that had been before rejected, and I have decided in no instance upon the quantity of Land to be granted in consequence of them—Improve- ment is not a very definite term and the discretion between one hundred Acres and four I was not very willing to use without some Rule—if less was given to some and more to others an accusation of partiality was a pretty certain consequence to one side, and if the whole quantity generally given of prodigality and disregard of the public Interests on the other side. Should the President Sir, think this a Matter of sufficient importance for legislative interference he will doubtless lay it before Congress—if it is not I hope I may be honored with his Instructions relative thereto. N° 589 contains a list of those claims so far as they have appeared. The Donations to the Heads of Families in the Illinois Country have not yet been laid out, altho the Orders for that purpose were issued in 1790—the delay has been owing to several Causes, there was but one Person to be found in that Country who had the least acquain- tance with Surveying7U here—I was under the necessity of appointing him, but I believe he found himself inadequate to the task, and con- scientiously deferred it—another was the poverty of the People— ruined as they have been by the changes of Governments they have been subjected to—by the Events of the Revolution wherein their property was seized, to a great amount, by the Officers of Virginia without any recompense—by the depredations of what was called the Wabash Regiment, self organized in that Country and which sub- sisted by Plunder and by the frequent innundations of the Missis- sippi—they were unwilling to part with any of their movable property to acquire lands which they could not cultivate, and were restrained from selling till five Years after Possession had been given them— they were in hopes too that as Congress had exonerated the Inhab- itants of the Country on the Wabash from both those Conditions,71 the same favour would be extended, to them, and therefore did not press for their being laid out. The Reason for so marked a Distinction between the Inhabitants of two different parts of the same Country, and in exactly similar Circumstances I could never comprehend, and I do hope that Congress will put them on the same footing, at any 08 Not found. » See report of Feb. 10,1791, ante, p. 327, and Journal Exec. Procs., Sept. 28, 1795, post, III, 440. 7 1 Act of Feb. 21, 1793, 1 Stat. 318. 128650—34 36
Page 546
546 TERRITORIAL PAPERS rate the five Years, should in my Opinion be computed from the time the Orders for surveying issued, for that there was an incapable person appointed was not the fault of the People, and they should not be injured either by that, or that the country did not afford one that was capable. Patents for the Donation Lands that have been alloted to the Heads of Families are much pressed for by those who are entitled to them. I had conceived that the Governor was fully authorized for that pur- pose by the Resolutions of Congress respecting them, and had prepared a form which I submitted to Mr Randolph when Atty General—He, however, was of Opinion that the Patents must issue from the Presi- dent of the United States.72 On this, Sir, I would beg leave to observe that the Records of the Surveys and the Documents are in the Terri- tory—that a Certificate which would be attended with some charges must necessarily go from the Office of the Secretary here before a Patent could be obtained, from the Office of the Secretary of State— that after the Patent was obtained it must be brought back to the Territory and recorded in the County where the Land lies—and that the distance from Philadelphia or any other place where the Seat of the Government may be, and the Expense that attends any delay there are good Objections, such indeed as would render the Donation a mere illusion, No Order, however, has as yet been taken in the Case, that I know of, and People know not where to apply. Donations also of one hundred Acres have also been ordered to be given by the Govr to those who were enrolled in the Militia on the first of Augt 73 1790 and not entitled to those of [MS. illegible] I have no difficulty as to those, because the Words given by the Govr I con- ceive a sufficient Authority. They have been ordered to be laid out, and a list of the Persons entitled is contained in N° [blank] the paper, marked N° [blank],74 is a Conveyance of two extensive Tracts of Land from the Piankishaws to Lord Dunmore and his associates, in which it is to be observed that there is an express acknowledgment that the Lands lying between those Tracts, beginning at the Point Coupé and running with the Wabash to the mouth of the White River, about twenty four leagues and running into the Country forty leagues on the east and thirty leagues on the west, is reserved for the Use of the Inhabitants of St Vincennes. That is the Tract the few People who have signed the Petition reclaim for the french Inhabitants. That the Land was actually relinquished by the Indians when a Post was first established at that Place I have no doubt, but it is evident the relinquishment was to the french government and not to the Inhab- itants, because Mr de Sl Vincens, the first Commandt gave small n Opinion of Attorney General, Mar. 25, 1794, ante, p. 477. » Provided for in act of Mar. 3, 1791, ante, p. 341. 74 Neither enclosure has been found.
Page 547
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 547 pieces of it to individuals immediately, on the express Condition that they should be improved in a year or be void, within the bounds of that Reservation are all the Lands that have been laid out, but a difficulty arises from the Treaty of Greenville 75 with respect to those not yet laid out in the Country on the Mississippi. To take that Treaty literally every foot of Land in the Country not in the actual Possession of some individual has been relinquished to the Indians, and should that construction prevail it is impossible for Congress to fulfill the Promise of Donation without violating it. The lands ac- tually granted heretofore cover nearly the whole of the Mississippi Bottom between Kaskaskia and Cahokia, and many Grants have like- wise been made for considerable portions of the high Lands, and claims are made in addition of an ancient improvement made by the Savages, not less than thirty Miles up the Kaskaskia. Those People can not be said in the strict sense of the Words to be in [MS. illegible: posses- sion?] and some explanation it appears to me will be necessary—It was a part of my Instructions to enquire into the Claims of the Indians to Land and to extinguish them, but at that time I could not find that any Nation laid claim to them—The Cahokia Nation, reduced to four or five Families had abandoned the Country entirely—The Peorias amounting to about 100 had likewise abandoned it, and the Kaskaskia Tribe of about twenty Families laid claim to nothing but the Site of an old Village near Kaskaskia and about four thousand Acres of Land, which was confirmed to them by an Act of Congress. In all the Coun- try from Kaskaskia to the Mouth of the Ohio, and across to the Wabash not one Indian resided, tho the Miamies, the Kickapoos, and the Oiatanons and perhaps some others occasionally hunted in it— and it is now a good deal frequented by the Shawanese and Delawares from the spanish side still, I am persuaded there are none of them have a just claim to those Lands, but when they learn, for the Country was the Peorias—and there will not be wanting People enough to inform them, that all the Lands except what was possessed on the 3d of Augt last have been relinquished—Owners enough will certainly appear. The only places where the Donations could be laid agreeably to the Resolutions of Congress, and in the Country below the Kask1 between the River and the high lands for the Heads of Families in that Settlement, in the low grounds above Cahokia for that Settle- ment and in the Mississippi Bottom as it is commonly called for those of the Prairie du Rocher & St. Phillips, if lands sufficient can be found there, which when the former appropriations are laid out I am per- suaded there cannot—a power therefore to lay them out somewhere else should be given. The encroachments of the Spaniards in the Territory below the Ohio, I know the Governt are apprised of—from some Depositions »«Aug. 3, 1795, ante, p. 525.
Page 548
548 TERRITORIAL PAPERS taken before me, and which were sent to Gen1 Wayne,78 they are estab- lishing themselves in considerable force—it was thus described a large and strong Fort nearly compleated whereon about three hundred Men were constantly employed, thirty Pieces of Cannon already mounted, and six Galleys in the River. It was further deposed that several young Men, Inhabitants of this Territory passing down the Mississippi had been seized and forced to work upon the fortifications. Such con- duct contrasted with General Gayosos Letter to me,77 N° [blank] does not put the Spanish Character in a very fair point of View. N° 8 78 is my Answer. An interview, however, I should have avoided if I had not been obliged to leave that part of the Country, because I was wholly unauthorized on any of the Objects he had in View, except preserving what Harmony now subsists, so long as the Government shall think it proper. The Commandant at St. Louis made likewise, a proposal that in case any of the Indians from our side of the River made incursions into the spanish Territory, or any of the Indians from the Spanish side into the Territory of the united States that both par- ties should be at liberty to pursue and annoy them, as they country [continue] in the Country of each other. There may be occasions when such an agreement might be useful, there are likewise very inconven- ient consequences that might follow from it—at any rate it was beyond my powers, and I should suspect those of Mr Tardeau 79 likewise, but into that I did not enquire, I told him frankly I had no authority, but would certainly communicate his proposal to the President. It is a fact that the Kickapoos from our side do commit depredations on the Spaniards, and the Shawanese and others from their side upon us, and retire immediately to their respective sides of the Mississippi four Negroes belonging to a Gent" at Prairie du Rocher were killed by a party from thence a short time before my arrival there. What the Intentions of the Government, are with regard to the Sale of the Lands80 in this Country I am entirely ignorant, but it is my duty to inform you Sir, that in my opinion, if they are not disposed of soon, such numbers of People will take possession of them, as may not easily be removed should that be thought necessary81—before I set out for the westward numbers of People from Kentucky had entered on the Lands of the U. S. to the westward of the Miami, and were making what are called improvements, I warned them to desist, without much effect, and it was all I could do, unless Actions had been brought 71 Not found. 77 Sept. 26, 1795, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 389-390. 78 Not found. 78 Zenon Trudeau, commandant at St. Louis; see Houck, Spanish Regime in Mo., II, 258. 88 See act of May 18, 1796, post, p. 552. 81 See Sargent to the Secretary of State, Jan. 20, 1797, post, p. 587.
Page 549
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 549 against them as Trespassers which I had no Orders to do. The num- ber however of those improvements had increased surprisingly before my return, so much so that, along the River, and a considerable dis- tance inland the Country is covered with Hutts, and I am told the Case is the same in the Country above, quite up to the Penn* line. The State of Connecticut Sir, in consequence of the acceptance of the Cession of western Lands made to Congress was supposed to have gained an acknowledged right to the Soil of a large Tract of Country within the limits of the western Territory, but that Govemt at an early day seemed disposed to usurp the Jurisdiction over it, for they appointed the late Judge Parsons Surveyor for that Tract, and directed the manner in which it was to be divided 82—some Letters passed between the Judge and myself on that occasion, and I also wrote to the executive of the State on the Subject, but received no Answer—a Copy of that Letter was sent to the Secy of State and may probably be on the files—my opinion was and still is, that before they proceeded to sell the Lands the consent of Congress should have been formally obtained—and that as to subdivisions of the Soil, beyond what was a mere consequence of ownership, it belonged to the executive of the Territory—I am informed by a Gentleman lately from that State, that the Legislature, in their last Session, passed a Law respecting the recording of Deeds within that Tract,83 in direct opposition to the Ordinance for the Government of the Territory, which is a direct assumption of Jurisdiction. I am sorry to find I have troubled you with so long a Letter, but I have inserted nothing in it but what I supposed it proper and necessary you should be informed of. With much respect I have the honor &cts THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO FRANCIS DE HEBECOURT [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. D] GPO Jan* 6. 1796 Francis De Hebecourt Esqr SiR I have received your Letters of the first and seventh Instant84 from which I am now more and more convined of the impracticability of a regular transportation of the Mail on the Ohio during the Winter especially.— 83 For Connecticut's right and jurisdiction over the Western Reserve, see the execution of the original deed, Sept. 13, 1786, ante, p. 22. See also deed of Dec. 31, 1798, post, p. 657, and act of Apr. 28, 1800, post, in, 84. B Resolve of the Legislature of Connecticut, May, 1795, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I,97. M Obviously should be ultimo. The letter of Dec. 1 is referred to again in the postscript but neither this letter nor that of Dec. 7 has been found.
Page 550
550 TERRITORIAL PAPERS No season can be more favourable than the present for navigating that river, and if the boats cannot perform regularly at this time under the present arrangements I fear none can be made to effect that pur- pose.—I shall however I believe continue to have the Mail carried by that route for this winter, and to obviate the difficulty respecting the Boat N° 3. which you represent to be in very bad order, and not worth repairing, I have desired Major Craig to furnish you with a new one. I think it will be best to endeavor to secure a regular transportation of the Mail in the manner it has been hitherto conducted. Having a Mail in advance will only secure the Boat going without one—but it will add one week more to the time in which the carriage of it ought to be performed, which is already I think more than sufficiently long for the distance it is to be carried I am &c J H. P S. In my letter of the 16th of Novemr 851 mentioned to you that Mr Graham and the Contractor both informed me that the failures were occasioned by the boat N° 3 which more frequently arrived on Saturday than on Thursday and the Contractor is commonly detained at Grahams Station until Saturday Noon. I do not nor cannot sup- pose, that Mr Graham and the Contractor have both wilfully misrep- resented this business and I am now persuaded from your Letter of the 1" of Decern" that you know of no other failure than the one you have mentioned. I think it is most probable however that you have been imposed on by the Boat man—from your representations I am also convinced that you have used every means in your power to preserve a regular transportation of the Mail but I imagine the hands in the boat N° 3. have not exerted themselves to arrive at Gallipolis in time. In going down the river they can have no excuse for not arriving on Thursday. this is giving them three days (and going with a rapid Current) to perform one hundred & twenty five miles.88 PETITION TO CONGRESS BY EBENEZER ZANE87 [SF:4 Cong., 1 sess.:ADS] [March 25, 1796] To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States, the petition of Ebenezer Zane of Wheeling on the Ohio River.— Your petitioner confident that the public as well as individuals would derive great advantage from the opining of a road through the Territory North West of the Ohio, from Wheeling to Sioto River, & ■ Artie, p. 539. See also the Postmaster General to Graham, Nov. 16, 1795, ante, p. 540, and to McDowel, Nov. 17, 1795, ante, p. 541. M See the Postmaster General to Putnam, Dec. 16, 1796, post, p. 585. a Founder of the first permanent settlement on the Ohio River at the present site of Wheeling.
Page 551
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 551 from thence to Limestone in the State of Kentucky, and also to Fort Washington, Hath given Himself trouble & incurred some expence, in exploring the rout and ascertaining the practicability of the under- taking. That from an actual view of the Ground He Has no Hesita- tion in saying that a good waggon Road may with facility be made between these places, & at a moderate expence. That the more fully to demonstrate the practicability of the proposed road, He Hath at his own expence employ'd a number of labourers, and Hath actually made considerable progress in marking and opening the same in such manner as to be passible to travellers on Horseback; and is determined to Have the same compleated in that way in its whole distance previous to the last of April next. But as the proposed road must cross the Muskingum, Hockhocking and Sioto Rivers, streams fordable only in dry seasons; it must be obvious that it cannot be used by travellers with certainty and Safety without the establishment of Fer[ries] upon these rivers. These establishments cannot now be made without the permission and aid of Congress the land being the property of the United States. Your petitioner therefore prays that Congress will permit and authorize Him to locate military Bounty Warrants upon as much land at each of the crossings of the above Rivers as may in their Judgment be sufficient to support the desired establishments which He will engage to Have made in due time, & will also defray all expences which may be incurred in surveying and laying off such lotts of land. Your petitioner Holds land warrants of the above descrip- tion and only requests the priviledge of locating them in situations which may be pointed out by the necessity of the case, He asks no other compensation for his trouble, nor any reimbursement of his expences. In support of His application Your petitioner makes the following statement of some of the advantages to be expected from the proposed road: and in point of distance the saving must appear impor- tant. From Philadelphia to Fort Washington the distance by the rout commonly travelled is by computation . . . 980 miles—By the proposed rout 600. difference 380. From Phil* to Frankfort in Kentucky the usual rout 900. miles By the proposed rout 600. difference 300. In ditail From Frankfort to Limestone 70 miles From Limestone to Wheeling 190. From Wheeling to Phil* 340. 600.
Page 552
552 TERRITORIAL PAPERS The saving to the United States in the expence incurred for the trans- portation of the mail from Wheeling to Kentucky will also be considerable; at present fifteen men and their boats are employ'd in that Business at an expence not less than 4000 dollars pr Annum, liable at all times to great irregularity and delay from Floods, Ice, High winds &°. Upon the proposed road the same mail may be carried for 1000 dollars or less making a clear saving to the General post office of 3000 doll" pr Annum and at the same time will be attended with greater regularity and dispatch. The advantages which must result to Travellers, particularly emigrants are too numerous to be detailed; and too obvious to require it—Your Peti- tioner submits His application to the wisdom & discretion of the National Legislature and doubts not but upon a candid examination his request will be deemed reasonable: & the undertaking He is engaged in admitted to be meritorious & deserving of encouragement. Ebenezer Zane. [Endorsed] Legis: 1" Sess: 4th Cong: Petition of Ebenezer Zane praying liberty to locate military lands, at the crossings of certain rivers March 25th 179688 Petition of Ebenezer Zane AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE SALE OF LANDS NORTHWEST OF THE RIVER OHIO [SD:Original Statutes88] [May 18,1796] An Act providing for the Sale of the lands of the United States, in the territory north-west of the river Ohio, and above the mouth of Kentucky river90 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress assembled, That a Surveyor General shall be appointed, whose duty it shall be to engage a sufficient • 88 See "An Act to authorize Ebenezer Zane to locate certain lands in the terri- tory of the United States, northwest of the river Ohio ", approved May 17, 1796, 6 Stat. 27; report of House committee, Apr. 1, 1796, A.S.P., Misc., I, 145. The execution of the act was in the hands of Rufus Putnam (Buell, ed., Memoirs Putnam, pp. 125, 419-420). 88 Printed also in 1 Stat. 464-469. In preparing the present text for publica- tion it has been necessary to correct about forty punctuation points which had been altered in the Statutes version. There are other, though unimportant, discrepancies between the original and printed versions, including the addition of section numbering in the latter. 80 See the Secretary of the Treasury to the House of Representatives, July 20, 1790, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 8-9, and to the President, Dec. 1, 1790, Hamilton Papers (LC). The legislative stages of the bill may be followed in Annals, 1 Cong., 3 sess., 1741 et seq., 2 Cong., 1 sess., 25, 574, 3 Cong., 2 sess., 1223, 4 Cong., 1 sess., 66 et seq.
Page 553
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 553 % number of skilful surveyors, as his deputies, whom he shall cause, without delay, to survey and mark the unascertained outlines of the lands lying northwest of the river Ohio, and above the mouth of the river Kentucky, in which the titles of the Indian tribes have been extinguished, and to divide the same in the manner hereinafter directed; he shall have authority to frame regulations and instructions for the government of his deputies; to administer the necessary oaths, upon their appointments; and to remove them for negligence or misconduct in office.91 Be it funher enacted, That the part of the said lands, which has not been already conveyed by letters patent, or divided, in pursuance of an ordinance in Congress, passed on the twentieth of May, one thousand seven hundred and eighty five,92 or which has not been heretofore, and, during the present session of Congress, may not be, appropriated for satisfying military land bounties,93 and for other purposes, shall be divided by north and south lines, run according to the true meridian, and by others crossing them at right angles, so as to form townships of six miles square, unless where the line of the late Indian purchase, or of tracts of land heretofore surveyed or patented, or the course of navigable rivers may render it impracti- cable; and then this rule shall be departed from, no further than such particular circumstances may require. The corners of the town- ships shall be marked with progressive numbers from the beginning; each distance of a mile between the said corners shall be also distinctly marked with marks different from those of the corners. One half of the said townships, taking them alternately, shall be subdivided into sections, containing, as nearly as may be, six hundred and forty acres each, by running through the same, each way, parallel lines, at the end of every two miles; and by marking a corner, on each of the said lines, at the end of every mile; the sections shall be numbered re- spectively, beginning with the number one, in the north east section, and proceeding west and east alternately, through the township, with progressive numbers, 'till the thirty sixth be completed.94 And it shall be the duty of the deputy surveyors, respectively, to cause to be marked, on a tree near each corner made, as aforesaid, and within the section, the number of such section, and over it, the number of the township, within which, such section may be; and the said depu- ties shall carefully note, in their respective field-books, the names of « See the Secretary of State to Putnam, Sept. 30, 1796, and Oct. 1,1796, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 411-412; Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 25,1797, post, p. 588. Cf. also instructions of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mar. 14, 1797, post, p. 591. K Ante, p. 12. ■ See act of June 1, 1796, 1 Stat. 490-491. w See instructions of the Secretary of the Treasury to the superintendents of sales, Oct. 5, 1796, post, p. 583.
Page 554
554 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the corner trees marked, and the numbers so made: The fractional parts of townships shall be divided into sections, in manner aforesaid, and the fractions of sections shall be annexed to, and sold with, the adjacent entire sections. All lines shall be plainly marked upon trees, and measured with chains containing two perches of sixteen feet and one half each, subdivided into twenty five equal links, and the chain shall be adjusted to a standard to be kept for that purpose. Every surveyor shall note in his field-book, the true situations of all mines, salt licks, salt springs and mill-seats, which shall come to his knowledge; all water-courses, over which, the line he runs shall pass; and also the quality of the lands: These field-books shall be returned to the Surveyor General, who shall therefrom cause a description of the whole lands surveyed, to be made out and transmitted to the officers, who may superintend the sales:—He shall also cause a fair plat to be made of the townships, and fractional parts of townships, contained in the said lands, describing the subdivisions thereof, and the marks of the corners. This plat shall be recorded in books to be kept for that purpose; a copy thereof shall be kept open at the Sur- veyor General's office, for public information; and other copies sent to the places of sale, and to the Secretary of the Treasury.95 Be it further enacted, That a salt-spring lying upon a creek which empties into the Sciota river on the east side, together with as many contiguous sections as shall be equal to one township, and every other salt spring, which may be discovered, together with the section of one mile square which includes it, and also four sections at the center of every township, containing each one mile square, shall be reserved, for the future disposal of the United States: But there shall be no reservations, except for salt-springs, in fractional town- ships, where the fraction is less than three fourths of a township. Be it further enacted, That whenever seven ranges of townships shall have been surveyed below the Great Miami, or between the Sciota river and the Ohio company's purchase, or between the southern boundary of the Connecticut claims and the ranges already laid off, beginning upon the Ohio river and extending westwardly, and the plats thereof made and transmitted, in conformity to the provisions of this Act, the said sections of six hundred and forty acres (excluding those hereby reserved) shall be offered for sale, at public vendue, under the direction of the Governor or Secretary of the western terri- tory, and the Surveyor-General; such of them as lie below the Great Miami shall be sold at Cincinnati; those of them which lie between the Sciota and the Ohio company's purchase, at Pittsburg; and those between the Connecticut claim and the seven ranges, at Pitts- burg. And the townships remaining undivided shall be offered for sale, in the same manner, at the seat of government of the United 85 See Nourse to the Department of State, Aug. 17,1802, post, III, 241.
Page 555
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 555 States, under the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, in tracts of one quarter of a township, lying at the corners thereof, excluding the four central sections, and the other reservations before mentioned: Provided always, that no part of the lands directed by this Act to be offered for sale, shall be sold for less than two dollars per acre.96 Be it further enacted, That the Secretary of the Treasury, after receiving the aforesaid plats, shall forthwith give notice, in one news- paper in each of the United States, and of the territories north west and south of the river Ohio, of the times of sale;97 which shall, in no case, be less than two months from the date of the notice; and the sales at the different places shall not commence, within less than one month of each other: And when the governor of the western territory, or Secretary of the Treasury, shall find it necessary to adjourn, or suspend the sales under their direction, respectively, for more than three days, at any one time, notice shall be given, in the public news- papers, of such suspension, and at what time, the sales will recommence. Be it further enacted, That immediately after the passing of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall, in the manner herein before directed, advertise for sale, the lands remaining unsold in the seven ranges of townships, which were surveyed, in pursuance of an ordi- nance of Congress, passed the twentieth of May, one thousand seven hundred and eighty five, including the lands drawn for the army, by the late Secretary of War, and also those heretofore sold, but not paid for; the townships, which, by the said ordinance, are directed to be sold entire, shall be offered for sale, at public vendue in Philadelphia, under the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, in quarter town- ships, reserving the four center sections, according to the directions of this Act. The townships, which, by the said ordinance, are directed to be sold in sections, shall be offered for sale, at public vendue, in Pittsburg, under the direction of the Governor98 or Secretary of the western territory, and such person, as the President may specially appoint for that purpose,99 by sections of one mile square each, reserv- ing the four center sections, as aforesaid; and all fractional townships shall also be sold in sections, at Pittsburg, in the manner, and under the regulations provided by this Act; for the sale of fractional town- ships: Provided always, that nothing in this Act shall authorise the sale of those lots, which have been heretofore reserved in the townships already sold.1 Be it further enacted, That the highest bidder for any tract of land, sold by virtue of this Act, shall deposit, at the time of sale, one twen- tieth part of the amount of the purchase money; to be forfeited, if a 84 Cf. sec. 5, act of May 10, 1800, post, III, 91. "The Secretary of the Treasury to Sargent, Aug. 12, 1796, post, p. 566. w hoe. ext. M For the appointment of George Wallace, July 15, 1796, see post, p. 562. 1 Cf. sec. 4, act of May 10, 1800, post, ill, 90.
Page 556
556 TERRITORIAL PAPERS moiety of the sum bid, including the said twentieth part, is not paid within thirty days, to the Treasurer of the United States, or to such person as shall be appointed by the President of the United States, to attend the places of sale for that purpose; and upon payment of a moiety of the purchase-money, within thirty days, the purchaser shall have one year's credit for the residue; and shall receive from the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Governor of the western territory, (as the case may be) a certificate describing the land sold, the sum paid on account, the balance remaining due, the time when such balance becomes payable; and that the whole land sold will be for- feited, if the said balance is not then paid; but that if it shall be duly discharged, the purchaser, or his assignee, or other legal representative, shall be entitled to a patent for the said lands: And on payment of the said balance to the Treasurer, within the specified time, and producing to the Secretary of State a receipt for the same, upon the aforesaid certificate, the President of the United States is hereby authorised to grant a patent for the lands to the said purchaser, his heirs or assigns: And all patents shall be countersigned by the Secretary of State, and recorded in his office. But if there should be a failure in any payment, the sale shall be void, all the money theretofore paid on account of the purchase shall be forfeited to the United States, and the lands thus sold shall be again disposed of, in the same manner as if a sale had never been made: Provided nevertheless, that should any purchaser make payment of the whole purchase money, at the time when the payment of the first moity is directed to be made, he shall be entitled to a deduction of ten per centum on the part, for which, a credit is hereby directed to be given and his patent shall be immediately issued.2 Be it further enacted, That the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Governor of the territory north west of the river Ohio, shall, respec- tively, cause books to be kept, in which shall be regularly entered, an account of the dates of all the sales made, the situation and numbers of the lots sold, the price at which, each was struck off, the money deposited at the time of sale, and the dates of the certificates granted to the different purchasers. The Governor, or Secretary of the said territory shall, at every suspension or adjournment, for more than three days, of the sales under their direction, transmit to the Secretary of the Treasury, a copy of the said books, certified to have been duly examined and compared with the original. And all tracts sold under this Act shall be noted upon the general plat, after the certificate has been granted to the purchaser. And be it further enacted, That all navigable rivers, within the terri- tory to be disposed of by virtue of this Act, shall be deemed to be, and 3 Cf. sec. 5, act of May 10, 1800, post, in, 91.
Page 557
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 557 remain public highways: And that in all cases, where the opposite banks of any stream, not navigable, shall belong to different persons, the stream and the bed thereof shall become common to both. And be it further enacted, That the Surveyor General shall receive, for his compensation, two thousand dollars per annum; and that the President of the United States may fix the compensation of the Assistant-surveyors, chain-carriers and axe-men: Provided, that the whole expense of surveying and marking the lines, shall not exceed three dollars per mile, for every mile that shall be actually run or surveyed.3 And be it further enacted, That the following fees shall be paid for the services to be done under this Act, to the Treasurer of the United States, or to the receiver in the western territory, as the case may be; for each certificate for a tract containing a quarter of a township, twenty dollars; for a certificate for a tract containing six hundred and forty acres, six dollars; and for each patent for a quarter of a town- ship, twenty dollars; for a section of six hundred and forty acres, six dollars: And the said fees shall be accounted for by the receivers, respectively.4 And be it further enacted, That the Surveyor General, Assistant- surveyors, and chain-carriers shall, before they enter on the several duties to be performed under this Act, severally take an oath or affirmation, faithfully to perform the same; and the person, to be appointed to receive the money on sales in the western territory, before he shall receive any money under this Act, shall give bond with sufficient security, for the faithful discharge of his trust:5 that, for receiving, safe-keeping, and conveying to the treasury, the money he may receive, he shall be entitled to a compensation to be hereafter fixed.6 Jonathan Dayton Speaker of the House of Representatives. Samuel Livermobe President of the Senate, pro tempore. Approved May the Eighteenth 1796 G° Washington— President of the United States I certify that this Act did originate in the House of Representatives. John Beckley,—Clerk. 3 See Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 25, 1797, post, p. 588, and the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, post, p. 591. 4 A more complete definition of the function of the receivers of the land office is found in the act of May 10, 1800, sec. 6, post, III, 92. « The Secretary of the Treasury to John Neville, July 15, 1796, post, p. 562. 1 This act was amended by the act of May 10, 1800, post, ill, 88, et seq.
Page 558
558 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD: Letters Atty. Gen., 1792-1810: ALS] Philadelphia 26th may 1796 The Attorney General is of opinion that the President alone and without the advice of the Senate cannot appoint a Commissioner to hold or make a treaty with an Indian tribe for the purpose of purchas- ing and extinguishing their title to land within the limits of the United States. The 12th Section of the act to regulate trade with the indians passed the 19th 7 instant, prohibits every person who is not employed under the authority of the United States from negotiating any such treaty or convention, directly or indirectly. The expression under the authority of the United States cannot mean any other thing than the Constitutional authority of the U. S. which it is considered cannot be bestowed on any person but by the President with the advice of the senate. Charles Lee To the Secretary of State [Endorsed] Opinion of the Attorney General respecting the making of Treaties with the Indian tribes—May 26th 1796 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [MHS:Pickering Papers: ALS] Private Cincinnati June8 the 9th 1796— I have lately my Dear Sir taken the Liberty to write you a private Letter suggesting the possibility that Governour Sl Clair might not be in the Territory seasonably for the Evacuation of the western posts, which Event has now I am informed taken place and the Governour sick in Ligonier— »1 Stat. 469-474, replacing the statute of Mar. 1,1793, 1 Stat. 329-332. See Annals, 4 Cong., 1 sess., 39 et seq.; Doe ex dem. C. Chinn ». Darnell (4 McLean, 440); treaty of Greenville, Aug. 3, 1795, ante, p. 525; treaty of Holston, July 2, 1791, 7 Stat. 39. 8 Although the original letter bears the date of June 9, its context would indicate that it was probably written subsequently to that of June 20, post, p. 560. In the latter letter Sargent had evidently not been informed of the evacuation of the western posts, nor had he learned of St. Clair's illness at Ligonier. It is furthermore noted that he speaks of Washington's message to Congress of May 25, 1796, which could hardly have been transmitted to Cincinnati as early as June 9. The letter of June 20 was answered by Pickering on Aug. 11, post p.565; that of June 9 two days later, post, p. 567. The above letter may have been written either on June 29 or July 9.
Page 559
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 559 You will very readily conceive of my Embarrassments upon this Occasion— The President it seems, from his Communication to the house of representatives,9 thought an additional sum to the Governour and secretary's pay necessary in order to enable them to discharge their Duties in those remote parts of this Country—must it not then be extreme distressing for me Sir to be constrained to perform all those Services upon the one fourth part of Salaries deemed in their Total inadequate—I trust I shall very soon be honoured with your observa- tions for my Government. By this Opportunity I take leave to make some few observations which arise in the apprehension of Censure for Delay in my official Communications which should have been made in Decr and June last and which it is still out of my power to transmit—for I am altogether ignorant of proceedings in the Executive Department of this Govert from the Time of leaving to my return to the Territory no minutes Thereupon have ever been furnished either to me, or the Gentleman (by the Governours Consent) my Deputy10—They may have been sent in here since I left Philadelphia and miscarried—All these Cir- cumstances I commit to you Sir in Confidence because I wish to stand well in your Opinion and feel pain at the possibility of being suspected of Negligence and Inattention in Office. I believe however that the proceedings of the Executive in the period before mentioned have not been very important—The Laws, though, should have been as early as possible submitted to Congress— my Deputy delayed them I presume for the event of the minutes before mentioned which put it out of his power to make his Commu- nication complete—And since my Arrival, and the rising of Congress I have not believed it so very material but that I might take Time to effect the very many Corrections which are necessary in the printed Copies, One of which I have now the honour to Transmit,11 And it is perfectly according with the rolls in my office I take Leave to present my best wishes for your Family and have the honour to be with most respectful esteem your obedient humble Serv W Sargent [Endorsed] (private) Winthrop Sargent June 9. 1796. recd Augt 5 ansW113th12 8 May 25, 1796, Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, i, 196. 10 Thomas Goudy. 11 Printed by W. Maxwell, Cincinnati, and reprinted in Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvII), 123-290. 12 Post, p. 567.
Page 560
560 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [MHS: Pickering Papers :ALS] Private Cincinnati North western Territory June 20th 1796 Dear Sir I presume to trouble you with a private note to request if perfectly compatible with your Idea of propriety to be favoured with a Line of Advice to govern me in Case Governour Sl Clair should not arrive soon in the Territory; which may happen from Sickness or some other Cause— Ought I to consider the immediate Operation of the Civil Authority at Detroit and the other posts of so much Importance as to follow the military as early as possible after their possession; and might I in such Case reasonably calculate upon every Facility from Govern- ment—At my own Expence I cannot proceed either as Governour or Secretary without more & more involving myself in those pecuniary Embarrassments of which I have so long in vain complained; but I have heretofore sacrificed, and in the Discharge of my Duty might perhaps again repeat it with your Advice and Judgment, on which I have very great reliance:—merely as Secretary I do not believe I am absolutely obliged to attend the Governour, though from Courtesy & believing I have been useful to him attention has been cheerfully afforded generally—At this Time however I could not command money sufficient for a Tour of the parts without borrowing or very much distressing myself, which mere Civility can not impel me to— I shall however be goverened by your Opinion Sir if you will favour me with it, however repugnant it might be to any of my own Opinions— I beg Leave to present my Respects to your Family—your Son I hope enjoys health ere this— with every Sentiment of respect and Esteem I am my Dear Sir your most obedient humble Servant W Sargent P. S. a Mr Samuel Freeman13 who is now the printer at this Place (and the only one in the Territory) has applied to me for a recom- mendation to the Post Master General to keep the Office here vice Maxwell whom he has succeeded as printer and who has or will give up this Business;—that is the post office— I believe Mr Freeman to be an honest man and capable of this Duty and if it be not too troublesome I will thank you to cause his name to 1, Samuel Freeman purchased the unsold interest of Colonel Patterson, one of the original proprietors of Cincinnati, in November, 1794; see Jacob Burnet to Charles Cist, Oct. 5, 1844, Cist, Cincinnati in 1859, pp. 18-24. Freeman and his son Edmund purchased the Centinel of the North-Western Territory in 1796 and changed its name to Freeman's Journal (Quaife, ed., Askin Papers, BHR, I, 583).
Page 561
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 561 be mentioned to the Post master Gen1 as I have not the honour to be known to him— Honh1" Col Pickering [Endorsed] Winthrop Sargent, Esqr Cincinnati June 20.1796 answd Augt11th14 THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO THE PRESIDENT [LC: Washington Papers: ALS] Philadelphia 27 June 1796. Sir. I have the honour to inclose you Adjutant General Beckwiths 15 answer18 to my dispach to Lord Dorchester of the 10th of last month17 I inclose, likewise, copy of the orders for the evacuation of the posts of Fort Miamis—Detroit and Michilimackinac18 the originals of which will leave this to-morrow morning at 5 o'clock by express. Cap" Lewis delivered the orders requiring the evacuation of Oswego & Niagara to Cap" Bruff at Albany. With the greatest respect I have the honour to be Sir your most obt Servt James McHenry The President. [Endorsed] The Secretary of War 27th June 1796 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE PRESIDENT [SD: Misc. Letters: ALS] Department of State July 11.1796. Sir, Agreeably to the intimation in your letter respecting a sur- veyor general,19 I take the liberty to inclose the application of Israel Ludlow, with the certificates of recommendation which he has this morning delivered to me.20 He is about twenty nine years of age, of a good person and agreeable manners. I have thought it proper on this occasion to inclose the applications of Mr John Hall21 & Joseph Ellicott,22 whose names were formerly 14 Post, p. 565; see also Sargent to the Secretary of State, Aug. 9,1796, post, p. 563. 15 Sir George Beckwith, agent of Lord Dorchester; see Cruikshank fed.), Simcoe Papers, I, 94. June 3, 1796, Mich. Hist. Colls., xxv, 122. "May 10, 1796, ibid., p. 117. 18 General orders for the evacuation of the posts are printed ibid., pp. 120-121. See act of May 18, 1796, ante, p. 552. 20 Ludlow's application, July 9, 1796, and supporting statements, are in SD Archives (Misc. Letters). "For testimonials of William Vans Murray and John W. Kittera, May 23, see loe. cit. 22 For his application, May 25, see loe. cit. 126650—34—37
Page 562
562 TERRITORIAL PAPERS mentioned as applicants. Mr Hall, I understand, is of a respectable family in Maryland; which I suppose has led Mr Murray to urge his appointment. He married a daughter of Dr Ewing, is upwards of thirty years old, and now I take it resides in Pennsylvania. His politics, I am assured are perfectly correct. Personally I know nothing of him. I have yet heard nothing from Mr Adet. With the highest respect, I am, sir, Your most obl servant Timothy Pickering The President Of the U States. [Endorsed] From The Secret of State 11th July 1796 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO GEORGE WALLACE [GLO:Div. C, Misc. letter book One] Treasury Departt July 15th 1796. George Wallace Esqr Sir. I have the honor to inform you that the President of the United States has been pleased to designate you to perform, in con- junction with the Governor or Secretary of the North-Western Ter- ritory, the services mentioned in the Sixth Section of the enclosed Act of Congress, entitled "An Act providing for the sale of the lands of the United States in the Territory North west of the River Ohio, and above the mouth of Kentucky River." 24 As soon as the necessary arrangements can be made, notice of the time when the lands will be sold will be published as directed by the Act; of which you will be duly informed. I have to request that you would inform me whether you accept or decline the appointment herein mentioned. I am &ca E& THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO JOHN NEVILLE [GLO:Div. C, Misc. letter book One] Treasury Departt July 15th 1796. John Nevill Esqr Sir, I have the honor to inform you that the President of the United States has designated you to be the Receiver of the monies which may be paid at Pittsburgh for the sale of lands, pursuant to the enclosed Act of Congress, entitled "An Act providing for the sale "May 18, 1796, ante, p. 555.
Page 563
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 563 of the lands of the United States in the Territory North-west of the river Ohio, and above the mouth of the Kentucky river." You will receive notice of the time when the sales will commence, which will be as soon after the necessary previous arrangements are made, as the law will permit.25 The last Section of the Act, requires that the Receivers of monies should give Bond with sufficient security for the faithful discharge of their trust; if you accept this appointment a bond conditioned for the payment of thirty thousand dollars will be accepted. You will observe that your compensation for this service is to depend upon a future provision to be made by the Legislature; which com- pensation will doubtless be equitably established and most probably with some reference to your appointment as Inspector of the Revenue.28 I have to request that your determination may be notified by the Returning Post. I am &ca Ex d ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [MHS: Pickering Papers :ALS] Fort Miamis upon the Miamis of the Lake August 9th 1796 I take the Liberty my Dear Sir to address to you another merely private Letter although I can have nothing very interesting to com- municate save that the Indians who are settled in the Vicinity of our Garrisons appear to enjoy very much of Contentment—some who were carried off by the Influence of M°Kee and Elliot are returning— their Cornfields look new and as whilst they are maturing they draw Rations from the public stores they give not themselves the trouble of hunting they have now all the happiness of supreme Indolence. The Traders who are here lead them sometimes into Excesses by the use of ardent Spirits—two Murders were the Consequence a few nights past but I trust regulations to prevent such abuse will speedily take effect— If I did not know that you have already recd very particular Infor- mation of the Country in my ante27 I should endeavour to describe it but I can not forbear to observe that notwithstanding the situations upon the Grand Glaize and miamis are very frequently high airy and 24 Notice of the date of sale was sent to the Governor and to the Secretary of the Territory, Aug. 12, 1796; see Smith(ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 403, and post, p. 566; instructions were sent to Neville and to the superintendents of sales, Oct. 5, 1796, post, pp. 580, 583. 24 Compensation for this service was fixed in the act of May 10,1800, post, III, 95. 27 Not found.
Page 564
564 TERRITORIAL PAPERS endowed with springs of tolerable good water yet for a very long Time to come they must be subject to intermittents and the Fever and Ague, because from all those Northern rivers, in half or one mile and a half at most, the Country is flat sunken and full of putrid vegetable matter in the summer months— In my last Letter28 to you Sir I felt hesitation about this Journey of Duty—The Fatigue (which has been very great) did not Influence me, but the Expense was alarming—The president it appears thought proper that an Addition should be made even to the Governour's Salary29—I trust it will not always be permitted for me to be the Sufferrer. I am really sorry that the Governour was not in the Terri- tory to perform the Duties essential at and about Detroit—the Uncer- tainty of his Arrival and the pressing Application of Gen1 Wayne with a Knowledge that our Laws &c* ought immediately upon Evacu- ation of the Country to be promulgated amongst the people, have induced me to come forward—in a few days I expect to be at De- troit—it will be proper I conceive that I visit Michilmackinac also, it being often a place of very great service for Traders, not less than than 2 or 3000 collected as I am told at certain Seasons though the actual residents are very few—Detroit and this place therefore must be of one County and perhaps I may think it proper to include in the same the head Waters of those rivers discharging into Lake Erie—30 Though I have no Instructions upon the Subject yet 'tis probable I shall think proper to call upon all persons at Detroit and its Depend- encies (by proclamation) to exhibit their Claims to Lands,31 without however presuming to make any Decision whatever until the pleas- ures of Government be signified thereupon—At present it is my Expectation to return to Cincinnati ere Winter— I am Sir with very respectful Esteem your obedient humble Servt W Sargent hoNhle Col Pickering By my Dairy I am from Cincinnati 229 miles and it is said to be to the river raizin 36 To Detroit 36 [Addressed] private Honourable Timothy Pickering Secretary of State Philadelphia [Endorsed] (private) Winthrop Sargent Esqr Fort Miamis Augt 9. 1796. recd Oct. 14th * June 9 and 20, 1796, ante, pp. 558-560. 28 Message of May 25, 1796; see Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, I, 198. M For the transactions of Acting Governor Sargent in establishing Wayne County, Aug. 15-Sept. 30, 1796, see Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 447 et seq. »1 Aug. 16, 1796, ibid., p. 447.
Page 565
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 565 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Pickering Papers :LPC] (Private) Philadelphia Augt11.1796 Dear Sir, I am sorry that I delayed an answer to your private letter of the 20th of June.32 You ask whether the possessing of De- troit &c. by our troops, will require you to proceed thither, for the establishment of the civil authority? and whether in such case you may expect a reimbursement of the expence of the journey?—It will not be proper for me to advise in what manner you should execute your office, with the duties of which you are better acquainted than I can be. At the same time it seems obvious, that by the authority of the United States, exercised by the proper organs, provision should be promptly made to extend to our new fellow citizens the protection and benefit of the laws of the Territory of which they are inhabitants. The operation of the municipal laws will doubtless be indispensable in those new districts. Until such provision shall be made, how will crimes be prevented or punished, or injury be redressed? What compensation would be made to Governor Sl Clair or to you, or to both, if you proceed to Detroit &c. to institute civil government in those new districts, I cannot undertake to determine: but should a compensation be made, I suspect it must be from the fund appropri- ated for the contingent charges of government, as for a case unpro- vided for by law. Yet to this it might be objected, that your salaries were received in full for all the services necessary to be performed by you as Governor and Secretary of the Territory; and hence a doubt might arise whether the Contingent fund could be touched in this case.—Since you wrote you will probably have seen that the President sent a message to the two houses of Congress,33 stating the necessity of establishing civil government at Detroit &c when possession should be obtained of the posts, and the expediency of a pecuniary provision for the expence which would attend the journey of the Governor & Secre- tary for that purpose.—This was done near the close of the session, upon the suggestion of Gen1 St Clair. The House of Representatives (with whom any bill must have originated) I believe took no order upon it: at any rate, no provision was made. Under these circum- stances, I feel myself embarrassed: I see the necessity of the service; I mean the erecting of a civil authority in the new districts; and yet, if for that purpose the presence of the Governor, or of the Secretary of the Territory, be indispensable, I cannot ensure to either an indem- nity for the expence; I would, however, use my utmost endeavours to « Ante, p. 560. u May 25, 1796; see Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, 1, 198.
Page 566
566 TERRITORIAL PAPERS obtain it. But lest these should not succeed would advise that as little expense as possible should be incurred. A few days residence there might suffice to ascertain suitable characters for offices; and for the settlements above Detroit, probably satisfactory information may be there obtained of persons most proper to be appointed. And possibly this may be effected for even Detroit itself. I am affraid that all I have said will yield you little satisfaction. I wish it were in my power to be more decisive. With great respect & esteem I am, sir, your obl servt T. Pickering. P. S. You kindly express your wishes relative to my son who was sick at your departure: he was a son particularly dear to me—& his death has inflicted the deeper wound. Winthrop Sargent Esqr Turn over Since writing the foregoing, I have thought it would be well to send you a copy of the President's message on this subject: you will find it herewith. T. P. [Endorsed] Aug4 11t 96. (private)34 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [GLO:Div. C, Misc. letter book One] Treasury Departt August 12th 1796. Winthrop Sergeant Esqr Secy of the N. W. Territory. Sir. I herewith enclose several copies of the advertisements which I have published according to law for the sale of the seven ranges of Townships in the North Western Territory35. The time fixed for commencing sales at Pittsburgh is the 24th day of ensuing October. The Act requires that the sales at Pittsburgh shall be made "under the direction of the Governor or Secretary of the Western Territory, and such Person as the President shall specially appoint.—The Person named by the President is George Wallace Esqr of Pittsburgh 39 Whether the Governor can attend at the time appointed is a circum- stance of which you will be informed by him; if he cannot attend, your presence will be indispensably necessary. I shall be happy to hear from you as soon as it can be ascertained whether the sales are to be conducted under your direction or that of the Governor. I am &ca Ex* "Answered Sept. 30, 1796, post, p. 576. "Act of May 18, 1796, ante, p. 555. »• July 15, 1796, ante, p. 562.
Page 567
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 567 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [SD:Dom. Letters, ix:C] Department of State August 13.1796. Winthrop Sargent Esqr Sir On the 5th instant I received your private letter of June 9th 37 accompanied by a printed copy of the laws of the Territory of the United States northwest of the river Ohio.38 In my private letter of yesterday39 you have my opinion in answer to yours of the 20th 40 and indeed of the 9th relative to the expense which must probably attend the introduction of the laws of the Territory into the new Districts of Detroit and Michilimackinac. I am sorry that I cannot officially assure you of a reimbursement. I am with great respect and esteem Sir &c. Timothy Pickering. PROCLAMATION ORGANIZING WAYNE COUNTY [DPL:Burton Collection:ADS] [August 15, 1796] PROCLAMATION" By Winthrop Sargent Acting as Governour of the Territory of the [L.s.] United States Northwest of the river ohio To all persons to whom these Presents shall come—Greeting Whereas by an ordinance of Congress of the thirteenth of July one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven42 for the settlement of the Territory of the United States Northwest of the river Ohio, it is directed that for the due Execution of process civil and criminal the Governour shall make proper Divisions of the said Territory a[n]d pro- ceed from time to time as circumstances may require to lay out the same into Counties and Townships—and whereas it appearing to me expedient that a new County should immediately be erected, to include the settlements of Detroit &ca I do hereby ordain and order that all and singular the Lands lying and being within the following Bound- aries Viz,—beginning: At the mouth of the Cayahoga river upon Lake Erie, and with the said river to the portage between it and the Tuscarawa branch of the Muskingum—thence down the said branch to the Forks at the carry- "Ante, p. 558. »8 For 1795; see Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvII), 131-290. »• Aug. 11, 1796, ante, p. 565. «° Ante, p. 560. 41 Printed also in Mich. Pion. and Hist. Colls., VIII, 496. See under same date Journal Exec. Procs., post, p. Ill, 447. ° Ante, p. 39.
Page 568
568 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ing place above Fort Lawrance—thence by a West Line to the eastern Boundary of Hamilton County (which is a due Nort line from the lower Shawonese Town upon the Sciota River) thence by a line west notherly to the southern part of the portage between the miamis of the ohio and the Sl Mary's river—thence by a line also west notherly to the Southwestern part of the portage between the Wabash and the Miamis of Lake Erie, where Fort Wayne now stands—thence by a line westnotherly to the most southern part of Lake Michigan—thence along the western shore of the same to the Northwest part thereof (including the Lands upon the streams emptying into the said Lake) thence by a due north Line to the territorial Boundary in Lake Supe- rior and, with the said Boundary through Lakes Huron, St Clair and Erie to the mouth of Cayahoga river, the place of Beginning—Shall be a County, named, and henceforth to be styled the County of Wayne—which said county shall have and enjoy all and singular the Jurisdiction, rights, Liberties, Priviliges and Immunities whatsoever to a County appertaining and which any other county that now is, or hereafter may be erected and laid out shall or ought to enjoy conform- ably to the ordinance of Congress before mentioned.— In Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the seal of the Territory this fifteenth day of August in the Twenty first year of the Independance of the United States A.D. one thousand seven hundred and ninety six.— Winthrop Sargent JUDICIAL ORGANIZATION OF WAYNE COUNTY [DPL:Burton Collection:ADS] [August 19, 1796] By Winthrop Sargent Acting as Governour of the Territory of the [L.s.] United States Northwest of the River Ohio43 To all persons to whom these presents shall come—Greeting Know ye that we have authorised and empowered Robert Navarre, James Abbot, Lewis Beufait, James May, Joseph Noyes, Francis Navarre and Nathan Williams—Esquires Justices of the peace of the County of Wayne with others the Justices of the peace of the said County alltho' not herein named that now are or hereafter may be appointed, and by these presents do authorise and empower the said Robert Navarre—James Abbot, Lewis Beufait, James May, Joseph Noyes, Francis Navarre & Nathan Williams Esquires with others, the Justices of the peace as aforesaid to hold and keep a Court of Record in and for the said County of Wayne, to be named and styled agreeably to the Law in that case adopted and published the Court of General Quarter Session of the Peace of the County of Wayne, (of which we 43 See under same date, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 450.
Page 569
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 569 will that the before named Robert Navarre, James Abbot, Lewis Beufait, James May, Joseph Noyes, Francis Navarre and Nathan Williams Esquires—or any of them shall always be) and therein to enquire by the oaths of good and lawful men of the said County of Wayne by whom the truth may be better known of all and all manner of Thefts, Trespasses, Riots Routs and unlawful assemblies whatso- ever and all and singular other—misdeeds and offences of which by Law Justices of the peace in their general sessions may and ought to enquire by whomsoever and howsever done or perpetrated or wh[ich] shall hereafter happen howsoever to be done or attempted in the County aforesaid contrary to the form of the ordinance of Congress and of the Laws and Ordinances that now are or hereafter may be adopted and published for the common good. And to hear and deter- mine all and singular the said Thefts, Trespasses Riots, Routs unlawful assemblies and all & singular other the premises and to do therein what to Justice appertaineth according to the Laws and ordinances aforesaid. In Testimony whereof I have caused the public seal to be hereunto affixed Dated at Detroit this nineteenth day of August Anno Domini 1796 and of the Independance of the United States the Twenty first Year. Winthrop Sargent GENERAL ANTHONY WAYNE TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [CHS:Wolcott Papers :LS] Duplicate Head Quarters Detroit 4 September 1796 Sir I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 29th of July,44 requesting the most accurate information on a suite of Queries in order to facilitate a compliance with the instructions of the House of Representatives to report ''a plan for the collection of duties, upon the River Mississippi, and on the northern boundary of the United States" 45 In obediance to your requisition I have availed myself of the fullest information, collected from several of the first Merchants and traders belonging to the North West Company, Just arrived from Michilli- mackinac and other places of depot, on their route to Montreal and Quebec, as well as from those concerned in the trade on the Mississippi, Miamis, and this place, which in addition to other information and my own knowledge of the country posts and relative positions, I am free to hazard the following answers to your Queries in the order they "Not found. « May 23, 1796, Annals, 4 Cong., 1 sess., 1428.
Page 570
570 TERRITORIAL PAPERS were required from N° 1 to 7 inclusive, which I trust will be found pretty authentic 1" On Lake Erie the principal trading place is Sandusky a very considerable part of the Detroit Indian trade, is carried on by the channel of the Miamis river and by the carrying place at Fort Wayne, down the waters of the Wabash; there are generally some traders on the river Huron & au Resen, all of which empty themselves into Lake Erie On Lake Huron the principal trading post is La guina on the west side of the Lake; there are some places of less consequence on the East side viz—Mateldass, Massissugue, & La Cloche; but with those I presume we have no concern On Lake Michigan La Bayl, St Josephs & Chicago are the most considerable places of trade 2. I know of no places that promise greater advantage than those establishments which have been always maintained on those Lakes, and Waters connected with them, (by the French and British) with a few others which I shall mention in the following answer The British have lately made a military establishment on the Island of Sl Josephs in Lake Huron, distant from Michillimackinac about fifteen or twenty leagues 3a It appears to me that the Posts we are now in possession of viz Miamis, Detroit & Michillimackinac, with the addition of One at Sandusky, and another at Chicago (and which were contemplated In the Treaty of Greeneville) are very proper and suitable for posts of Entry, either to regulate Commerce, or enforce a due collection of duties All the Southern, or Mississippi trade, must of necessity pass from Canada by Lake Michigan, to which Michillimackinac is the key, but the door is rather too wide to close without the aid of a Gun or Guard boat, Michillimackinac being situate upon an Island nine miles from the main land, or place where Old Michillimackinac formerly stood Hence Chicago may be a necessary Auxiliary; I am of Opinion there is no necessity for extending the collection districts on the lakes beyond that point, unless it shou'd be deemed expedient at a future period to establish a Post at La Bayl at the bottom of Greene bay 4 The British have a right agreeably to the 3d Article of the Treaty46 of Commerce, to transport their Goods over all portages whatever without paying duties, but I apprehend, that it must have been intended, that such portages lead to or were, the usual & natural route to trading establishments not within the Territory of the United States The portages of that description, are St Marys on the streight Joining Lake Superior, to that of Huron, and the Grand portage, on the North » Of 1794 (the Jay treaty); see Miller (ed.), Treaties, 2: 24S-274.
Page 571
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 571 west side of lake Superior, where it passes thro' part of the Territory of the States; possibly the following carrying places leading to the Mississippi, were also intended, but of this you will Judge from the general tenor of the article From Lake Michigan there are two great water communications which lead to the Mississippi; One by the Illinois river, which is enter'd from the bottom of Lake Michigan by means of a portage called chicago (already mentioned), the other from La Bayl, at the bottom of Green bay—up the Fox river, from thence into the river Ouisconsing by a portage of about One mile; there are sundry trading posts upon all those rivers— 5 The Merchandize Sent from Canada to the Mississippi are gen- erally transported by the Grand or Ottawa river & French river into Lake Huron by Canoes, thence into lake Michigan to the Mississippi, by either the One or the other of the communications mentioned in the 4th answer 6 No other Post than Michillimackinac appears necessary for the use of the Portages; but there may eventually several be necessary to prevent the introduction of Goods into the American Settlements without paying duty viz Buffalo Creek & Presque Isle on Lake Erie, at the confluence of the Illinois with the Mississippi, where we have a reservation of twelve miles square, at the mouth of the Kaskaskeas on the Mississippi, & at Fort Massac on the Ohio, large quantities of merchandize ascend the Mississippi from New Orleans and the Ohio to Post vincennes, and may also be introduced duty free into all the Settlements on the rivers emptying themselves into the Ohio above Massac, hence that will be a very essential Post of entry Here permit me to suggest that the Posts at the rapids of the Ohio, and at Fort Knox on the Wabash, might be abandoned and the Garrisons and stores transferred to the mouths of the Kaskaskias & Illinois rivers, which would complete the chain on the Mississippi, when the Posts now occupied by the Spaniards on the East side of that river, are possessed by the Troops of the United States agreeably to Treaty; particularly that of the Natches which ought to be a Post of entry as well as that at the Chickasaw Bluffs, unless the place of depot to be granted by the Spaniards will answer every purpose, which I rather think will not be the case 7 The principal trading Posts on the East side of the Mississippi, above the Ohio are the Cahokea & the Prairee de Chene, situate a few miles above the confluence of the Ouisconsing river with the Mis- sissippi, where there is a considerable French Settlement and which serves as a kind of depot, and place of departure for a defusive trade This place (wou'd circumstances at present permit to extend so far up the Mississippi) naturally presents as a proper situation for a Military establishment, it is however said that a great part of the
Page 572
572 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Mississippi trade is carried on by the British on the Spanish side of that river, & that there is no difficulty in obtaining from the Spanish Government a permit for that purpose, when thought necessary. Having now answer'd your several Queries agreeably to the best information I am possessed of, I shall forbear hazarding an Opinion "what degree of Competency are in with regard to supplying the Posts in their vicinity with Provision" until I have examined further But I should suppose from appearances that the Posts of Miamis Detroit & Michillimackinac, might be supplied with the article of Flour & perhaps some meat by the farmers on each side the river Detroit, and who appear very ready to part with their produce, at a very extravagant price I also have ground to believe that a Garrison at Kaskaskias, & probably at the mouth of the Illinois, cou'd be supplied in that quarter; at least a Colonel St Clair48 (who has been very urgent for a Post at the Kaskaskias) assures me that the Troops can be supplied with provision on moderate terms; but I do not give or offer this as authentic I shall always & at all times be happy in Communicating to you any information which in my Judgement, may be useful or beneficial to our Common Country, whenever you may please to require it Interim I have the honor to be with Sentiments of the highest respect and esteem Your Most Obedt & very Hum. Servt (signed) Anty Wayne The Honble Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury department of the U S. vide Sir I have been under an error with respect to the boundary line between the United States and Spain until I examined the ratification of the Treaty which arrived by express last evening, I had always understood the boundary to be the beginning of the 31° degree of Latitude, but find it to be the northermost part of 31° or beginning of the 32°, hence the Natches will not be within the boundary of the United States—The mouth of the yazoo must therefore be the post of entry, in place of the Natches.49 5th September 1796 4 8 William St. Clair. "The above postscript was crossed out, apparently by some one in the office of the Secretary of the Treasury, after the receipt of a second letter from Wayne, Oct. 18, 1796, post, p. 584.
Page 573
573 SECRETARY SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [MHS: Sargent Papers: D »] Detroit, Wayne County, and Territory North West of the Ohio, September 20th, 1796. Sir:—I received the letters which your Excellency thought proper to write me upon the 15th 51 and 28th of August62—the latter yester- day and the former only this day. Collectively, Sir, I feel them to have been intended as a very severe reprimand. I had flattered myself that a most anxious desire to have benefited by your Excellency's matured judgment in the administration of government and studiously avoiding all agency therein, other than what I believed myself absolutely constrained to the performance of, might and would have shielded me from the implications of censure from your Excellency. Could I have divined, Sir, that you had intended being in the Terri- tory at so early a period,63 I should have spared myself the fatigue, hazard and expense of a journey from which I might have been exempted by your presence, but which (under existing circumstances in my occasional character of your official representative) I believed the Ordinance of Congress for our Government—the President's Message to the Senate and House of Representatives," and the press- ing necessities of the people as represented to me by the Commander in Chief of the Army with his urgent application in print, all combined to make it indispensably incumbent upon me. The public seal, Sir, which you seem to have expected I should have left I supposed properly remained with me as Secretary; for though the new law, nor you, Excellency, under the same, have declared me the "keeper of the Seal," yet such has heretofore been the territorial usage, and I cannot surmise that you could now wish to change the measure, but if I am deceived, you have only to signify your pleasure when we meet and no pecuniary considerations you will find can induce on my part the endeavour to contravene your Excel- lency's purposes. In all my public and private relation towards you, Sir, I have the pleasing consciousness of conducting myself in honour, delicacy, and ingenuously—therefore, not to have merited the shadow of censure. I have the most particular desire myself, Sir, and I take leave to communicate to your Excellency for very sufficient reasons, to solicit that the general government would take efficient measures to prevent that collision which you apprehend from my occasionally exercising *° From a typed copy of a draft. "Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 404. •» Ibid., p. 405. « See Hodgson to Sargent, June 4, 1796, Sargent Papers (MHS). 44 May 25, 1796, Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, I, 198.
Page 574
574 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the functions of the Governeur, and I could wish, Sir, that an applica- tion upon this subject might be made by your Excellency—as it respects me, it seems absolutely necessary. When I believed your Excellency considered Cincinnati as the most central and proper place for the seat of Government and deposit of the Public Records, where, upon returning to the Territory, you would resume your func- tions as Governeur, I could in safety for my rule admit the Acts of Congress requiring of me at certain times the discharge of your Excellency's duties—but (all pecuniary considerations ), experience has now taught me that the law in conjunction with certain acts of the Territory may be so construed by wicked and designing men as too often to subject me to harrass and very great embarrass- ment; and you cannot now be ignorant, Sir, that several bills of indictment originated in the inferior Courts of Hamilton County are now pending against me for exercising the Governour's functions when I could not know your Excellency was within the Territory without a spirit of divination. I introduce not this, however, Sir, to draw forth the fine feelings of Friendship in my favour either for the present or to come, for if I err in duty towards you or the public, I ask not impunity. To accusation and trial, I have voluntarily subjected myself, but no man under Heaven has over me the right of reprimand. Your letters, Sir, which I have herein acknowledged were handed me upon my return from the Michilimakinac, where I had been to promulgate the Laws, etc., after having previously erected a new County and made most of the civic and military appointments therein, specific detail of which I would enclose but for a little cut in my hand that prevents more writing at present than is absolutely necessary. I shall, however, Sir, remain here, as you tell me you are going to Pittsburgh, so as to complete the necessary duties upon the part of the Gouverneur in ... to give firm operation to the Laws of the Territory before my return to the Ohio which I trust will be effected in October. I have informed the Secretary of the Treasury that I should have obeyed his mandateM had not your Excellency's pleasure been signified for the execution thereof yourself. I have presumed, Sir, to address to you four letters M upon the subject of the minutes necessary for my official communications since I took the liberty of convening with you thereupon in Philadelphia, one of which only you acknowledge to have received and which it seems I have either miswrote or you have misread, for the papers I am deficient in are back as far as the division of St. Clair County, and instead of the "three weeks" since the report (of which they must be » Aug. 12, 1796, ante, p. 566. *• No one of these letters has been found.
Page 575
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 575 a part) becoming due, almost nine months have elapsed, in all which time, and a preceding five months, I have been obliged to keep the proceedings of the Executive upon loose sheets, in order to preserve the due regularity in the records, and must have to transcribe all the same therein so soon as you may be pleased to put it in my power, which I trust you will not delay, when I assure you it not only multi- plies my writings twofold but a great deal hazards the same whilst they continue thus in loose sheets.67 SECRETARY SARGENT TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [MHS: Sargent Papers :DM] Detroit, BOth of September, 1796. SiR:—I received your Excellency's letter of the 6th inst59 day before yesterday. I deem myself peculiarly unfortunate in so much and so often incurring your disapprobation. "The records of the Territory" are indeed with me at Detroit, notwithstanding the hazard of transporting them so great a distance by land and water. I had believed, Sir, that I might have been enabled to have brought them up complete by communications to have been received from your Excellency and which I have been every day expecting. At present there are no entries therein since the August of 1795,60 which in case of misfortune to myself might appear as a proof of negligence I do not allow myself in. If it had been otherwise and the records duly made, I should have believed it my duty to have locked them up, because they are especially in my keeping and for injury to them I am responsible. When I have left the Territory, I have been obliged to commit them, and myself also, in some degree; but whilst present I have in person generally attended your Excellency or the Legislature when there has been occasion to refer to them; and once or twice when indisposition has prevented my answering your demand myself and constrained me to commit them to your servant—although they have been sealed up and every precaution taken on my part to prevent accident or misfortune—it has been with extreme reluctance I have suffered them to be taken from my office, as I believe it to be altogether at my own peril. "Answered Dec. 1, 1796, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 413-417. A con- temporary copy is in the Ohio State Library. Sargent's reply, Feb. 13, 1797, is among the Sargent Papers (MHS). 58 From a typed copy of a draft. ■ Smith (ed.), op. cit. pp. 405-406. •"'Entries in the official records to Nov. 1, 1795, were supplied; see St. Clair to Sargent, Aug. 13 and Dec. 1, 1796, ibid., pp. 404, 413-417. Contemporary copies of the latter are in the Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 576
576 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I have the honor to be respectfully, Your Excellency's Obedient Humble Servant, W. S. To Governor St. Clair. SECRETARY SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OHS: Sargent Papers:C] Detroit Northwestern Territory private 30th of Sepr. 1796 Dear Sir I am very much indebted for your private Letter of the 11th of August61—In extending Government to this Country General Wayne has a great Deal facilitated my movement by fur- nishing a Transport for the public papers &ca. but for myself Servant &ca . &ca. you can readily Conceive I have necessarily been subjected to much contingent Expense—Government will however I trust increase my pay so as to embrace the same— I felt it Sir as a Truth, severe, as extraordinary (you will excuse me) whilst at michilimakinac, that the british Crown was actually then paying one Governour of the Island who is some where in England Scotland or Ireland—and the United States another, absent, the Lord knows where, at the same time that I was constrained without any, the smallest provision or Consideration to exercise the Functions and discharge all the Duties of the same: Lt Govr Patric Sinclair receives pay as the Governour of the Island of Michilimakinac at this Day. It would afford me great pleasure Sir to give you Satisfaction by any Information from this Country—I press not the matter at present Sir because I know not to you the useful, and fear intruding upon your Time, but should any Considerations make it desirable I request you would command me. I can not avoid repeating in this private Letter Sir that I believe a priest amongst the Savages might be made very beneficial at 'mak- inac—The numbers of the Indians there I have given in my official remarks and here it may be proper to observe that there seems to be a great want of Equity in the Division of the annual bounty of the United States, which has however been agreed upon, to the red people and for which I see no remedy without an increase of that bounty:— whilst some Indians—the Kaskaskias for Example are receiving five hundred Dollars and actually do not (I know them personally) exceed thirty in men women and Children, living amongst, and constantly spunging upon the white people in the Village of their name—there are others whom the United States have adopted—the reverse of those, because they are respectable in numbers and in Arms—who do 11 Ante, p. 565.
Page 577
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 577 not in a general Division receive a pin's point62—'makinac is, and I am persuaded will be continued a place of great Consequence to the Fur and peltry Trade and of Course it might be good policy to shew some attention to the Indians in the Vicinity—Im—and Exports are from the best Information I have had nearly as valuable through this medium as by the Falls of St Mary's.— permit me to take you Sir for a moment to the "Grand portage" you pass through St Mary's to go to it, whence it is 500 miles Distant— here are Erected Buildings whence a very considerable Traffic to various Quarters is driven by men calling themselves the N West Company who by an immense capital have heretofore excluded all others63—apprehensive however that the enterprising Spirit of our Countrymen might require new Exertion on their part every Inch of Ground upon the portage has been enclosed that might admit of buildings stores &ca under various and frivilous pretences—all this Information is recd from such a Quarter that by me it is implicitly believed, but yet not Authority enough to make of it an official Com- munication—I have however directed one of the magistrates who has gone into that Country upon his own private business to make such observations as might enable him to report particularly and correctly to me—The "Grand portage" is it seems altogether within the U States Territory and from the Nature of the Country must be made use of not only as a portage but as a trading place also—you will excuse me Sir because 'tis from a good motive that I take Leave to suggest the propriety,—importance of early ascertaining and deter- mining this matter, as well as the Channels or Lines which divide the American and british possessions.—At this moment perhaps all such business might be easy and very amicably settled, but time and Circumstances which operate on all men might materially change public Characters— You will have no Doubt Sir that the british have erected a block house upon the "Isle de bois blanc" 64 at the mouth of Detroit river and nearly opposite their New Fort—this is wrong, for though a vessel of Considerable Burthen may be brought up to the west of the Island yet the passage is dangerous, requires a fair Wind and has no where so much Water as to the East, the Channel which has been used time immemorial—and which is mentioned to you Sir to enforce my suggestions— « Cf. treaty of Greenville, Aug. 3, 1795, ante, p. 529; act of May 9, 1796, 1 Stat. 469-474; the President to the Wyandot and other Indian tribes, Nov. 29, 1796, Washington Papers (LC). a Stevens, Northwest Fur Trade, pp. 116-119, 138-142. M For instructions relative to fortification at this point, and for discussion concerning possession, see Cruikshank (ed.), Simeoe Papers, IV, 122, 283, 298, 332-333. 126650—34 38
Page 578
578 TERRITORIAL PAPERS If any or all of those matters should eventually be to be decided upon by the Governour of the Territory, though a man of unparal- leled Vigour and Exertion both of mind and body, the Interests of the United States and of Individuals would certainly suffer from Delay because there are important Concerns of the Inhabitants in many of the Counties equitably entitled to prior Consideration—For Example—the Land Claims of the people of Kaskaskias, Cahokia and other villages upon the Mississippi and Vincennes and other places upon the Aubashe:—at Vincennes and upon the Aubashe most of the business is completed—it commenced with me and has not I natter myself been denied any attentions in my power to bestow— So soon as the affairs of the western Counties shall have been ar- ranged, the people of Wayne County must be attended to—and all this will engross very much Time in which the Governours Duties will be very fast accumulating—for the period can not be far distant when the Territory (or Hamilton County for them) will claim their house of general Assembly65 &c\ &ca.—upon this Subject I beg leave to observe Sir that the people of Hamilton and Washington Counties seem not ever to have been intended to live under the same Government—the latter are like unto our Fore Fathers and the former (generally) very licentious & too great a proportion, indo- lent and extremely debauched— The people of Wayne County—those upon the Aubashe and Missis- sippi are descendents of the Canadians, the ancient French—upright and docile in their Dispositions—equal in their mind and manners and tolerably contented and happy but not enough however indus- trious particularly upon the Mississippi and Aubashe—all those people would I am persuaded if left to their own Election infinitely prefer remaining a Colony of the United States And if they should at all comply with a requisition for Delegates to a general Assembly of the Territory, it would be with very great reluctance—The Expense and very great Fatigue of the Measure would no Doubt have its Influence and those to thinking men ought to be of very much Consideration— From Cincinnati (a probable place of meeting) to the Mississippi by the very shortest road will be three hundred miles and to Detroit an equal Distance; almost all the way a wilderness and a great propor- tion of the year impassable—yet notwithstanding all this I have no Doubt that the Ambition of a few men of the County first mentioned may and will make it the Governours Duty at a very early period to endeavour to convene a general Assembly and though probably without Effort yet very much to the Embarrassment of the people unless an early Division of the Territory shall take place—the people M See the proclamation of St. Clair calling for the election of delegates to the General Assembly, October, 1798, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 514.
Page 579
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 579 of Wayne & the three Western Counties may be taken by the hand Sir and led to be every thing the United States would wish them. In the message of the President to the Senate and house of repre- sentatives upon the Subject of extending territorial Government to this place &ca. he seems to believe it necessary that the Secretary as well as Governour should be present68—I hold the Opinions of the President in such supreme respect that Acquiescence is almost a national Consequence but the Records and public papers of Gov- ernment that have been some years accumulating have now become voluminous or bulky and 'tis extreme inconvenient, as well as hazardous to them, to transport them from one Extreme of the Territory to another, and I had once very nearly lost them all upon the Mississippi—besides it appears to me that an office to which a County, and Individuals of a County occasionally may have cause of reference should be stationary somewhere—it has been removed from the Muskingum once, and where my Interests strongly drew me, because the Governour appeared to think Cincinnati a more proper place; and as my necessities absolutely oblige, and will oblige me to continue a Servant of the public I could not hesitate to fix it any where that should be thought proper even to my own Expense of the third office & dwelling house I should then have been constrained to erect within the Territory—but the travelling from County to County seems not to me necessary to Government or to be demanded of me—I could no Doubt be useful to the Governour as a private Secretary and this I have always been when In my power from Motives of Friendship: Governour & Secretary's Duties conjointly have all been performed by me and perhaps upon as important Demands as have or may be made within the Territory—I ask Sir, if it be not improper, your private Opinion upon this Subject.— I beg Leave Sir ere I close this very long private Letter to draw your early Attention to a Law of the Territory "for raising County rates & Levies" 67 and another "subjecting Debtors to servitude" 88— they are a part of the Volume lately transmitted and may probably be reported upon by you early in the next Session of Congress—May not the first too much check industry and Improvement and does not the latter militate with the first part of the 6th Article of Compact published at the Close of the Ordinance of Congress for our Government July the 13th 1787—Viz: "There shall be neither Slavery nor involuntary Servitude in the said Territory otherwise than in punishment of Crimes whereof the party Shall have been duly convicted"—As I believe it my Duty Sir to observe to you every matter which may be anywise useful to "May 25, 1796, Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, I, 198. "Pease (ed.), Laws Northwest Terr. (IHC, xvil), 69-73. "Ibid., pp. 286-287.
Page 580
580 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the United States I can not but suggest an Apprehension of the british Indian Department in this Quarter—McKee who has perhaps power- ful motives to continue in the Savage mind an Enmity towards our Government neglects not I am persuaded any opportunity for the purpose; on concluding a late purchase of Lands from them he says— "my Children" * This Land is bought of you, not for our use but for your own, that when you are tired of your Step Father you may have a place to set down upon"—"it is true your Step Father has taken you by the hand but I am afraid he will deceive you"—"He formerly took your Brothers in Georgia by the Hand but he has lately killed ten of them and is now going there to kill more"— This Information I have from a Mr May70 one of our Magistrates who had it from an Indian that was present— The English people here Sir are still endeavouring to extend their Claims to the Indian Lands—they seem a little apprehensive of purchase and therefore receive the same in presents which the chiefs are prevailed upon to declare in Counsel are free and voluntary Gifts and to ask their Fathers the United States to confirm:—I am, in order to prevent this and for other purposes, printing the Law regula- ting Indian Intercourse71 &ca. which I trust may be attended with Statutory Effects— With sincere wishes for the happiness of yourself and Family Sir I have the honour to be most respectfully your obedient humble Servant W Sargent Honh1" Timothy Pickering [Endorsed] Secretary of State private 30th Sepr 1796 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO JOHN NEVILLE [GLO:Div. C, Misc. letter book One] Treasury Department October 5th 1796. General John Nevil Sir. The President of the United States having been pleased to appoint you to be the Receiver of monies72 which may be paid at * a Mr Polard M Sheriff in the british Government took the Trouble to call upon me and contradict—this whole matter, even pledging his honour no such Speech had even been made by McKee—a Copy of that whole Speech however has been handed by one of the Indians to whom it was made to General Wayne and prob- ably may be transmitted merely as private paper to the Secretary at War. [Foot- note on the MS.] •> Richard Pollard, Detroit merchant, 1784; 8heriff, we"ern di"rict of Canada, 1792; judge of pro- hate and regi8ter of E88ex County, Canada; Epi8copal mini8ter (Quaife, ed., A8kin Paptr8, BHR, 1,252). 70 James May. « May 19, 1796, 1 Stat. 469-474. "July 15, 1796, ante, p. 562.
Page 581
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 581 Pittsburgh on sales of the lots or sections in the seven ranges of, Townships, surveyed in pursuance of an Ordinance of Congress, passed on the 20th of May 1785 73—it has become my duty to furnish instruc- tions for conducting the said sales in a regular manner, and for ren- dering the Accounts thereof according to law—For the sake of per- spicuity these instructions will point out, not only what I conceive to be your duty, but also that of the Superintendants of the sales. The lots to be sold are those contained in a printed schedule or list enclosed signed by Me and with the seal of the Treasury annexed 7«— It is necessary that all sales and entries in the accounts should be made with reference to this schedule, as one or two errors of the press have been discovered in those formerly transmitted. You are to cause a Book to be prepared, ruled according to the form marked (D) which is to contain a record of all the sales.75 When a sale Has been made, you are to receive of the sum bidden one twentieth part in money,7' and thereupon to issue a certificate according to the form marked, A—Blank Certificates of this form will be transmitted which are to be carefully and accurately numbered in progressive order and filled up as sales are made by a good Clerk;— within the marginal checks, the principal particulars of the Certificates are to be inserted. When a Certificate for a Deposit agreeably to the form A has been issued, a record thereof is to be made in the Book, D—In recording Certificates of the form A—only the first eleven columns of the Book D will be used.—The example given of a supposed sale to James Frazier will illustrate what is to be done in this case.—If a sum sufficient to complete a moiety of the purchase money is not paid within thirty days after the sale the deposit is to be considered as forfeited to the public and the sale void—The sum deposited is then to be extended into the twenty first column of the Book, D, agreeably to the example given in the case of the supposed sale to James Frazier—If at the end of thirty days a sum sufficient to complete a moiety of the purchase money shall be paid, a Certificate is to be issued according to the form, B, to be signed by the Superintendants of the sales—To save unneces- sary trouble and expence it will be best that these Certificates of which blanks will be transmitted should be filled up under your direction. On issuing a Certificate according to the form B, a record is to be made in the Book D, from the twelfth to the twenty first column in- clusive;—the entries relative to the supposed sale of John Gibson, will shew what is to be done in this case. 73 Ante, pp. 12 et seq. « Not found. 75 Not found. 7« See act of May 18, 1796, ante, pp. 552 et seq., for provisions covering this and the following instructions.
Page 582
582 TERRITORIAL PAPERS If within thirty days from the time of a sale the Purchaser of a lot or section shall elect to make payment of the whole purchase money, he will be entitled to a deduction of ten p Centum on one moiety; and on payment thereof is to receive a Certificate, agreeably to the form, C, to be signed by the Superintendants of the sales.—The record to be made in the Book D in this case is illustrated by the entries relative to a supposed sale to John Wilkins, from the fifteenth to the twenty first Columns of the said form, D. On issuing the Certificates B or C, the Deposit Certificates of the form, A, are to be taken up and cancelled. It is conceived to be most proper that the cancelled Certificates A should remain in the hands of the Superintendants of the sales. Special care is to be taken to preserve accurate marginal entries respecting all Certificates which may be issued. It is recommended to the Superintendants of the'sales to sign no Certificates of the form B & C, without previously examining the records thereof in the Book D. As the Patents to be hereafter issued by the Secretary of State will be governed by the Certificates B & C, attention must be given to a proper description of the Range, Township and Section of the lands which may be sold. The form E is that of an account to be kept of the fees demandable under the eleventh Section of the Act directing sales;—these fees become payable, on issuing the Certificates B or C, the second Column refers to the number of the Certificates on issuing which the fees accrue. When the sales have been completed, or if they should be suspended for more than three days, the Superintendants of the sales are to examine the records in the Book D, and to certify the same, and are to cause a copy of the said Book with their Certificate to be transmitted to this office. With the Copy of the Book D, and the account of fees received E you are to transmit an account current according to the form F, in which will be credited agreeably to the principles proposed, all the monies which you shall have received. I shall expect to receive a weekly statement of the sums which may be received as also information of the probable future progress of the sales; the sums from time to time so received & exhibited in your weekly returns, will be held by you subject to the drafts of the Treasurer. I am &c* ExA
Page 583
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 583 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO THE SUPERIN- TENDENTS OF THE SALE OF PUBLIC LANDS AT PITTSBURGH [GLO:Div. C, Misc. letter book One] Treasury Departt Octobr 5th 1796. George Wallace Esqr and the Governor and Secretary of the N. W. Territory Superd> Gentm I shall transmit by this Post a letter of instructions to John Nevill Esquire who has been appointed to receive the money which may be paid on sales of the seven Ranges of Townships proposed to be made at Pittsburgh—In this letter I have taken the liberty to make certain suggestions relative to the mode in which I conceive it will be proper that your duties should be executed—to this letter I have therefore the honor to refer you. You will I doubt not discern that my motive in not addressing a particular letter to you, arose from the difficulty of perspicuously detailing the separate duties of the Receiver of the monies, from those of the Superintendants of the sales, and because the instructions principally relate to details which ought properly to be executed under his inspection and for which he is to be responsible. There is one point however which I think proper to communicate to you directly, and which ought to be well understood when the sales are made. I find that in the surveys made under the Ordinance of May 20th 1785 only the exterior lines of the Townships were surveyed, the interior Divisions into Sections have never been actually run. All therefore that can be known with certainty from the surveys in this Office is that the whole quantity of land in a given Township or fractional part of a Township amounts to a number of acres as ex- pressed in the printed Schedules—The quantities in fractional Sec- tions of fractional Townships as stated have therefore no other cer- tainty than was to be obtained by a calculation according to a geomet- rical Scale.—This, you are sensible cannot be entirely accurate; if it shall be hereafter found that the meanders of the Ohio, have not been accurately laid down, the basis upon which the calculations have been made, will be subverted." I conceive that this fact ought to be known in order to avoid future complaints of deception by the Public. The mode in which the information shall be given is submitted to your discretion, though, in my opinion it will be proper to say, that the quantity of land in the fractional Townships are stated in the schedules from the original surveys deposited in the Treasury, but that the quantities in the fractional sections are no otherwise known 77 See par. 2, act of May 18, 1796, ante, p. 553.
Page 584
584 TERRITORIAL PAPERS than by a calculation by a geometrical scale which has been made with as much accuracy as was possible.78 I have &c.&c. Ex6 GENERAL WAYNE TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [CHS: Wolcott Papers: ALS] Head Quarters Detroit 18th October 1796 Sir I have the honor to enclose a duplicate of my letter of the 4,h Ultimo? 79 the poscript to which, was the erroneous idea of the mo- ment, at first reading the treaty with Spain, the Natches being decid- edly 31° 25' North of the Equator, & consequently considerably within the limits of the United States; In the enumeration of ports of entry in that letter I confined myself to the Lakes & Waters, particularly mentioned in your letter of the 29th of July,80 but upon a retrospective & more comprehensive view of the subject, & particularly your expression "Northern boundaries of the United States" I take the liberty to suggest; whether ports of entry & Collection, may not also be necessary on the waters of Lakes Cham- plain & Ontario, viz Point au Fer, on Champlain—and at Oswego, Mouth of Genesee, & Niagara, on Ontario, these in addition to those mentioned in my letter of the 4th of September, wou'd apparently effectually bar, every avenue to the evasion of duties on goods im- ported by the Rivers St Laurence & Mississippi, into the settlements of the United States for consumption, on the Northerly & Westerly Boundaries; those ideas & opinions are submited with great deference & esteem by Sir Your most Obt & very Hum1 Sert ANTy Wayne The Honh1" Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury of the U.S [Endorsed] Detroit October 18th 1796 Agent Wayne on the subject of N° Boundary of U. States THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JOSEPH GILMAN [SD: Dom. Letters, IX: C] Department of State November 7.1796. Joseph Gilman Esqr Sir The President of the United States desiring to avail the public of your services as one of the Judges in and over the Territory » Cf. the Secretary of the Treasury to St. Clair, Aug. 12, 1796, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, II, 403. » Ante, p. 569. 80 Not found.
Page 585
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 585 of the United States Northwest of the River Ohio, I have now the honor of inclosing the Commission,81 and of expressing to you the sentiments of respect and esteem with which I am Sir your most ob. serv. Timothy Pickering. THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [GLO:Div. C, Misc. letter book One] Treasury Department November 11th 1796. Arthur St Clair Esqr Governor of the N. W Territory Pittsburgh Sir. I have the honor to receive your letter of October 28th.82 It is much to be regretted that the prospect of Sales is so unfavorable. The Captena and Sun-fish Creeks are laid down in the map remaining in this office agreeably to the Field notes, of which I send an extract83— it is possible that the names of these Creeks may have been transposed in the Copy sent to you, though I should be much surprised if this should appear be the case. The small Patent to Mr. Kemberly84 ought to have been noted. I however found this whole business in such a state of disorder, that it is not strange that the omission happened—The difficulties which would arise from the want of internal boundaries to the sections, were foreseen, I know of no means of remedying them further than have been suggested. I am &c. &c. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO RUFUS PUTNAM [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. F"] [Post Office Department] Decernr 16th 1796 General Rufus Putnam Sir Col. Pickering delivered me your Letter to him of the 11th of June,86 on the subject of the Ohio Mail, and I am much obliged to him for thus introducing to my acquaintance a Gentlemen of your Charac- ter and Information. For some time I had determined to drop the 81 See the Secretary of State to the President, Sept. 19, 1796, Pickering Papers (MHS); Gilman to Sargent, Feb. 13, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS). 82 Not found. 83 Not found. M Ephraim Kimberly, holder of military warrants, settled and improved 300 acres of land near Indian Short Creek (Jefferson County) before the system of rectangular surveys was instituted. It became an independent survey, for which the President was authorized to issue a patent, Apr. 18, 1794 (6 Stat. 14). 85 Printed also in Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, p. 413. 88 Not found.
Page 586
586 TERRITORIAL PAPERS route down the Ohio and resume that through the Wilderness as less expensive and more certain, for the many failures which happened during the course of last Winter in a great measure interrupted the intercourse with the North Western Territory and the State of Kentucky and tended to destroy all confidence in that Mail—Some obstacles however have occurred to resuming the route through the Wilderness which determined me to make a further trial of that down the Ohio especially as I had an opportunity of placing the Contract in the hands of Mr Greene 87 in whom I have the most perfect con- fidence. Mr Greene is of opinion that light and safe Boats may be constructed to be navigated with fewer hands and to much greater advantage in Stemming the Current of the Ohio than those hitherto employed which he represents as quite unfit for that service. I have agreed to allow him an additional Boat and he to provide four new ones at the public expence on the construction which he thinks will answer best. The Mails should be tarried in Portmanteaus as in case of accident they can be more conveniently removed and I presume the Boats will be large enough to admit of boxes fixed in such a manner as will secure the Mails from water.—if boxes are made, to render them perfectly secure, it will be necessary to have them covered with oil cloth. I now enclose you a blank Bond, Oaths, and Contract and I have to request the favor of you to see them executed by Mr Greene with proper security. The Contract is only to continue for a year at the expiration of which time I think it is probable that the Mail will be carried on Mr Zanes route from Wheeling to Limestone,88 this road I am told is already opened and has been passed by some persons who represent the distance to be about Two Hundred Miles, in this event Marietta may be accomodated with a cross Post to connect with the route from Wheeling to Limestone I shall thank you for any information you can give me respecting this road. I have been free in writing to you respecting this business as I know how much you are interested in having a Mail regularly carried on the Ohio as I cannot write particularly by this Post to Mr Greene. I will thank you to shew him the Contents of this Letter.89 JH 87 Charles Greene, for whom see Hulbert (ed.), Recs. Ohio Co., I, 131. See the Postmaster General to Greene, Mar. 17, 1797, post, p. 595. 88 See petition of Ebenezer Zane, Mar. 25, 1796, ante, p. 550, and the act of May 17, 1796, 6 Stat. 27. 8* Cf. the Postmaster General to de Hebecourt, Jan. 6, 1796, ante, p. 549; the Secretary of State to the same, Mar. 17, 1797, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, p. 418-419; the Postmaster General to Munroe, Greene, and de Hebecourt, Mar. 17, 1797, post, pp. 594 et seq.
Page 587
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 587 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [MHS: Pickering Papers :ALS] Cincinnati 20th of January 1797— Dear Sir Some time last Spring and immediately upon my arrival in this Territory I made communication if I mistake not of the very general Intrusions upon the Lands of the United States 90—the Steps I had formerly taken [to] prevent such measures And expressed that, without special Instructions from the General Government I should believe any further Interference of mine improper—my reasons, perhaps, were specially detailed;—Since then, people from various parts are flocking in, and principally establish themselves below the great Miami. I suppose in numbers, rising one thousand—some of them expect, I am told, to obtain a pre-emption farm settlement, others, and the greater part are induced by its remoteness from the magistrates of Knox County; of wh it is a part;—to be free as the Natives. It is the wish of many here that I should annex it to Ham- ilton County—but might not this be construed into countinancing their Settlements?—I fear myself unpleasantly situated in this Busi- ness and also in regard to some Lands said by Judge Symmes to have been purchased by him—but as yet I have made no appointments amongst them— I am inclined to think that Government—the General Governt I mean, might once very easily have prevented this squatting—The Consequences now must be considerably injurious and are every Day becoming more so in their Aspect, and if it shall be determined to remove the Settlers, in many Cases it must be extreme distressing:—I trust Sir these private Observations will not be displeasing—they are well meant. May I hope Sir ere the President abdicates that he will en- deavour to do for me one Act of Justice—he believed, it seems pro- vision necessary to the Secretary as well as Governour to perform cer- tain Duties; done by the Secretary—the house will not make it—to the Contingent Fund alone then can he look—I remember 'twas the Opinion of Col. Peck When I was soliciting Congress for Compensa- tion whilst I had been discharging Governours Duties that it ought to be made to me from that Fund but the President can want no Opinion if he thinks the measure proper, and if he does not I must continue to suffer.91 "May 16, 1796, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 444. See also t'6td., Dec. 9, 1794, Aug. 19, 1795, pp. 430, 439; St. Clair to the Secretary of State, January 1796, ante, p. 548. "See the President's message, May 25, 1796, Richardson (comp.), Messages and Papers, I,198; the Secretary of State to Sargent, June 30, 1797, post, p. 611; and to the Secretary of the Treasury, Oct. 16, 1797, post, p. 632; Senator Ross to Sargent Dec. 22,1797, Sargent Papers (MHS); the memorial of Sargent [Decem- ber], 1790, ante, p. 318; report of House committee, Feb. 13,1794, ante, p. 475.
Page 588
588 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I have the honour to be Sir with most respectful Esteem—Your obedient humble Servt W Sargent Honh1" Col Pickering— [Endorsed] Winthrop Sargent Jany 20.1797 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816 :C] Marietta January 25th 1797. Oliver Wolcott jr Esquire Secretary of the Treasury Sir, Having been appointed Surveyor General by the President of the United States,92 on the fifth of November, I wrote the Secretary of State,93 requesting to be informed in several matters which I con- ceived material, relating to prosecuting the Surveys, in answer to which he informed me that, "conceiving the business to pertain prop- erly to the Department of the Treasury he had sent my letter to you,"94 I have waited more than a month expecting to be honoured with your commands, but receiving no information from you, & apprehending that my letter, above mentioned, may be misplaced or forgotten—I take the liberty to repeat to you the substance of that letter, as it respects the execution of the Surveys, (Vizt)-—that I am ready to enter on the business as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made;—But before I proceed to engage with any Deputy Surveyor I expect to be instructed in regard to the compensation to be allowed to assistant Surveyors, Chain Carriers & Axe Men agreeably to the 10th Section of the act intitled "An Act providing for the sale of Lands &C."95—I wish also to know when and in what manner they are to be paid; whether there is any appropriation of monies for defraying the expence & if there is, in what manner it is to be drawn out—also whether Government will make any advances for the purpose of laying in provisions in the proper season of procuring them (to be furnished to the Surveyors who execute the work to be accounted for by them as part pay for their services) I wish also to know what number of Townships or Miles a Deputy Surveyor shall be obliged to run before he shall have a right to claim payment for his services—These cir- cumstances I not only wish, but conceive it is necessary I should be ascertained of, that I may not be liable to enter into contracts, which it will not be in my power to perform—And as the Laws contemplate M See the Secretary of State to Putnam, Sept. 30 and Oct. 1, 1796, transmitting the latter's commission as Surveyor General, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 411-412; and Putnam's acceptance, Oct. 15, 1796, ibid., pp. 412-413. « Not found. « Not found. •» May 10, 1796.
Page 589
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 589 the Survey of all the vacant unappropriated Lands lying North West of the River Ohio, and above the mouth of the River Kentucky in which the title of the Indian Tribes have been extinguished, I beg leave to suggest, that in my opinion it will be proper to have the boundary lines between these lands & the present Indian claims ascer- tained as soon as may be, to prevent all danger of our encroaching on the Indian lands in running the several tracts into Townships & because any location near them before the boundary lines are surveyed would probably occasion jealousies in the minds of the Indians which might prove of very bad consequences—I also wish to know if it is the expectation of Government that the running these boundary lines is to be under my directions or whether a special Commission is to be issued to some person or persons, for that purpose; If it is to be under my superintendency, as the first section of the act providing for the sale of the lands &c &c. appears to express, I wish to know if any special provision is made for defraying the expence, if not I pray whether such provision ought not to be made, because I conceive in order to give satisfaction, it will be proper to invite a number of Indian Chiefs to be present, & because that in my opinion these lines ought to be made very conspicuous by opening a Vestige of some feet in width which would be attended with considerable additional ex- pence, beyond the Survey of any other lines, & cannot be executed at the common allowance pr Mile—I also wish to be informed what part of the other survey, it is the wish of Government should be first attended to.—I hope Sir, you will be so good as to resolve me in these several queries as soon as may be, as the Season is fast approaching when the Surveys ought to commence, and I must repeat the observa- tion, that I cannot with propriety enter into any Contract for exe- cuting the business, until an appropriation of money is made by Government for paying the expence, which I do not find to be the case, by any act of Congress that has come to my knowledge," and besides, unless that some special provision is made for the expence of ascertaining the boundary lines between the present Indian Claims & the lands in which the Indian title is extinguished I much doubt if any Surveyor can be found to undertake the business.97 I have the honour &c &c Rufus Putnam 98 Ex? PS. I will thank you to forward me a copy of the ordinance of Congress of the third of September 1788,99 refered to in the fifth Sec- m By the act of Mar. 3, 1797, making appropriations for the support of govern- ment for 1797, $25,000 was provided to carry the surveys into effect (1 Stat. 500). w Cf. Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, May 18, 1797, post, p. 606. m Answered Mar. 14, 1797, post, p. 591. » Artie, p. 153. 0
Page 590
590 TERRITORIAL PAPERS tion of the act entitled "An Act regulating the grants of Land appro- priated for Military services, and for the Society of the United Brethren for propagating the Gospel amongst the Heathen."1 Exd PETITION TO CONGRESS BY INHABITANTS OF THE ILLINOIS COUNTRY [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:DS] [February 20, 1797] To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States in Congress assembled.2 The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Illinois Respectfully sheweth. That by Resolves of Congress of 20th June3 & 29th August 1788/ since ratified by Laws of the United States,5 a Donation of 400-Acres of land was made to each head of a family in the Illinois on or before the year 1783; which lands were therein directed to be laid off in form of a Pallologram adjadacent to the four respective villages therein— That the Lands so directed to be laid off for satisfying the said Dona- tions, as well as the most part of the lands in the Mississipi Bottom, are private property, by virtue of antient Deeds and by Laws of the United States confirmed to the respective Proprietors. Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that they may be permitted to lay out the said Donation Lands in Tracts on the waters of Kas- kaskia Creek, which runs in the Vicinity of the Settlements; And that his Excellency the Governor of the Territory be authorized to have the same surveyed and to issue out patents accordingly—And your Petitioners shall ever pray &c on Behalf of the Inhabitants J Edgar Wm Morrison Dated 20th February 1797. [Endorsed] Legis: 2d Sess: 5th Cong: Petition of John Edgar and William Morrison, on behalf of the Inhabitants of the Illinois. Feb- ruary 12th 1798.8 • June 1, 1796, 1 STaT. 490-491. • See Sargent to Senator Ross, Oct. 2, 1797, post, p. 630; Ross to Sargent, Dec. 22, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS). »Ante, p. 112. 'Ante, p. 146. 6 Act of Mar. 3, 1791, ante, p. 339. • See Annals, 5 Cong., 2 sess., 504-505, 508, 516-517, and report of St. Clair to the Senate, Jan. 7, 1799, post, in, 3.
Page 591
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 591 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816:0] Treasury Department March 14th 1797 Rufus Putnam Esqr Surveyor General Sir Your Letter of January 25th 7 was seasonably received, but as no measures could be taken by the Executive until an appropriation of money had been made, and as this measure was not adopted by Congress until the 3rd instant,8 it has been out of my power to answer your enquiries before this time. 1" The President of the United States directs, that it be submitted to your discretion to contract for the compensation to be allowed to the Assistant Surveyors, Chain Carriers & Axe men, on the best terms which may be practicable;—provided that the whole expence of sur- veying & marking the lines do not exceed three dollars pr Mile for every Mile that shall be actually run & marked.9— 2nd The purchase of provisions on public account for the use of the Surveyors and their Assistants, does not appear to be expedient; as this Measure would tend to complicate the accounts of your Depart- ment—reasonable advances of money will however be made directly to yourself from the Treasury, for which you will be held accounta- ble;—these monies may at your discretion be expended, in purchasing, provisions for the Surveyors to be accounted for by them in part pay- ment for their services:—but no credits will be allowed to you, except for services performed according to the Law—When advances are made, it will therefore be proper & necessary that you should be satisfied with the security therefor and that the same will be duly accounted for.— 3rd Your accounts are to be rendered to the Treasury for settlement, Quarter yearly, closed to the last days, of March, June, September & December.10—In these accounts all monies advanced from the Treas- ury to you, will be credited—the debits will consist of your Salary, & charges for services performed by the Surveyors & their Assistants pursuant to Contracts to be made with you—If monies are advanced on account, a list thereof is to be transmitted, and the amount thereof is to be stated as a component part of the balance to be accounted for by you in a subsequent settlement. 7 Ante, p. 588. 81 Stat. 500. • Cf. act of May 18, 1796, ante, pp. 552 et seq. 10 See Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 18, 1798, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 420-423; also consult index to the present volume under "Putnam, financial accounts".
Page 592
592 TERRITORIAL PAPERS 4th Copies of all contracts made by you with the Assistant Surveyors or other persons, are from time to time to be transmitted to this De- partment, as soon as the same are completed.11 5th The unascertained outlines of the Lands lying North West of the River Ohio, & above the mouth of the River Kentucky, in which the titles of the Indian Tribes have been extinguished by the Treaty with General Wayne on the 3d of August 1795,12 are to be run under your direction—You will inform General Wilkinson when & where you are ready to commence running the line, who will have orders from the Secretary of War, to furnish an escort, & who will take measures for convening such number of Indians as shall be thought proper; the expences of the escort & Indians will be defrayed by the Department of War.—Unless special inconveniences & extra expence render the measure inexpedient, you will in the first place ascertain and mark the North boundary of the Tract appropriated for satisfying Military Warrants, lying between the Scioto and the Tuscororas branch of the Muskingum River. 6th Your special attention to the completion of the surveys of the Lands appropriated for satisfying military Warrants by the Act of June 1" 1796, is requested. 7th You will be pleased to take measures for the survey of the three Tracts, of Shoenbrun, Gnaden hutten & Salem appropriated for the Society of the United Brethren by a Resolution of the late Congress, and an act of Congress of the 1" of June 1796. The Agents of the Society will proceed from Bethlehem in about three Weeks. 8th You will make arrangements for completing as soon as may be, the surveys of seven Ranges of Townships, below the Great Miami of the Ohio & above the mouth of the Kentucky River, also between the Scioto River & the lands purchased by the Ohio Company.13—Also between the Southern boundary of the Connecticut Claims & the seven Ranges of Townships, which were surveyed in pursuance of an Ordinance of Congress under the late confederation, passed on the 20th of May 1785—In commencing surveys within one or all of the several Tracts abovementioned, you will be governed by considera- tions having reference to ceconomy, the natural course of settlement the comparative fertility of the different Tracts, and the probability of speedy sales on account of the United States: Of the measures which you may adopt & your reasons, therefore you will be pleased to keep me duly advised.14 11 Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, June 8, 1798, GLO, Ohio SG, vol. 64. « Ante, p. 525. u See Putnam to Biggs, Apr. 22, 1801, post, III, 130. Cf. acta of May 18, 1796, ante, p. 553, and May 10, 1800, post, III, 89; report of the Secretary of the Treasury to the Senate, Feb. 2, 1798, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 81-82. 14 Consult index under "land" and "Putnam, Rufus".
Page 593
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 593 9th Plats of each Township are to be neatly & accurately protracted according to Law on durable paper, by a scale of two inches to a mile which are to be recorded in books to be kept in your Office—Copies of the plats & field notes are to be transmitted to this Department—The field notes are to be made out on good paper of uniform size & with such margin as will admit of being bound in durable books to remain in the Treasury. 10th Yo[u] will observe that the Law requires that the Surveyor General, the Assistant Surveyors & Chain Carriers, should before entering on their several duties take an Oath or Affirmation faithfully to perform the same—Though not specially enjoined, it appears to be proper, that transcripts of the Oaths or Affirmations so taken, should be transmitted to this Department.15 11th You are authorised to draw from time to time, such a sum not exceeding four thousand Dollars, as shall be necessary to enable you to execute the duties before mentioned, observing that your drafts are to be of the form, hereto annexed; Of all drafts you will advise me by the Post.— 12th You will be pleased to correspond with this Department stating the progress of the business committed to your management, and any points upon which further instructions shall appear necessary.— I have given directions to have a standard Chain prepared, by which to regulate the Chains of the Surveyors, which will be trans- mitted as soon as possible.16 In the meantime however your arrange- ments need not be suspended— As it may be difficult for you to procure suitable Stationary, the Register will by my direction transmit a few blank books, suitable for the records of the field notes and a quantity of paper on which the plats of Townships are to be protracted.17 The Act of Congress makes no provision for Clerkship in your Office, although it is certain that the service of a Clerk will be neces- sary.—Though I have no authority to stipulate for the United States on this subject, yet I do not hesitate to advise you to keep your accounts & records in perfect order, in confidence that Congress will hereafter authorise any necessary and reasonable expence.18 The Secretary of War will direct that that the escort which may II See document dated July 12,1797, post, p. 613. Other articles of agreement, and oaths, are in GLO, Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804, including those of Ludlow, Mathews, Worthington, Buckingham, Biggs, Bever, Langham, Marian, Barber, Stone, and Scofield. 18 The Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, May 8, 1797, GLO, Div. E, Ohio SGO, 1797-1806. 17 Nourse to Putnam, Mar. 30, 1797, ibid.; Putnam to Nourse, May 13, 1797, ibid., Div. E, SGO, vol. 48, 1797-1814, embodying brief acknowledgments. "See Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 18, 1798, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 420-423; Apr. 21, 1798, post, p. 645; and July 12, 1800, post, in, 98. 126650—34 38
Page 594
594 TERRITORIAL PAPERS attend the running of the Indian boundary shall assist in marking the line in a proper manner—With this aid, I have no doubt, that an allowance of three dollars per Mile will be found sufficient.19 I have &c &c O. W. Form of a Bill on the Treasurer of the United States Exchange for Dollars, 1,000, Territory North West of Ohio 1797. Ten days after sight pay to A.B or order, one thousand Dollars, on account of expences incident to the Act entitled "An Act providing for the sale of the Lands of the United States in the Territory North West of the River Ohio, and above the Mouth of Kentucky River," and for which sum I am to be charged and held Accountable.— I am & To Samuel Meridith Esqr Treasurer of the United States A sketch of a Plat of a Township in Sections N 6. 5. 4. 3. 2. 1. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12 18. 17. U 14. 13 19. 20. It 23. 24 30. 29. 28. 27. 26. 25 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36 s ExamA THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JOSIAH MUNROE20 [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. F] Gen1 Post Office March 17th 1797. Josiah Munro esq1" Sir If Mr Greene is of opinion that he cannot execute the Con- tract he has made with the public and should be disposed to relinquish it I wish to have the Mail carried from Wheeling to Prestons agree- able to the former establishment a Schedule of which is enclosed for your information. Answered Apr. 1, post, p. 598, and Apr. 8, 1797, post, p. 602. * The first postmaster at Marietta (Hulbert, ed., Recs. Ohio Co., I, 114).
Page 595
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 595 It will be necessary for Mr Greene, if he gives up the Contract, to continue carrying the Mail with his Boats until you can be prepared for entering upon this Service. The Boats Mr Greene has provided are on the whale boat Con- struction and I am told are well calculated for Navigating the Ohio you will of course employ them if it can be done to advantage on the plan in contemplation if not it is probable the Old Boats are not disposed of and may be readily got but at any event suitable ones can be procured for the purpose. they cost Twenty five Dollars and can be purchased without any difficulty You are well situated for superintending the boats of the upper and middle station and I have no doubt can get good hands on the terms offered. You will be allowed five pr Cent on all monies received and paid in transacting the business and I rely on your utmost exertions to make the most speedy and effectual arrangements for carrying that Mail, if Mr Greene relinquishes his Contract in which case you will give the earliest information to Mr De Hebecourt to whom I have written on the subject and who is to have the direction of the lower Boat. Any expences incurred for Boats &c you may draw for on this Office or I will remit you the money if more agreeable to you I am &c J. H. THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO CHARLES GREENE [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. F] [Post Office Department] March 17th 1797 Charles Greene esqr Sir Your Letters of the 13th and 27th Ult° are received the former on the 10th and the latter on the 16 Instant in both of which you assure me that the Boats will answer.21 Judge then Sir how much I was surprised at hearing there were no Mails from the State of Kentucky by the last Post. the latest date from that quarter is a mail of the 29th of December which was received the Post before the last—This is equal to a total stoppage of the communication by Post on that route, and I am induced to think you have undertaken a business that can never be duly executed. The Circumstance you mention of not receiving the Mail at Wheeling until Sunday Morning could not prevent your bringing up the Mails from Prestons though it might possibly create a weeks delay in receiving the Kentucky Mails at this City.—Under the former establishment the Mails were received here every week, frequently they were a week or two out of the regular course but nothing like the present failures was ever experienced. 21 These letters are not in the files of the Post Office Department.
Page 596
596 TERRITORIAL PAPERS My duty obliges me to take prompt measures for placing this business on a proper footing but I wish to avoid any harsh steps on the occasion—You have entered into a Contract which I see very little probability of your executing I am sure you will be candid on a subject so interesting to the Public and if it should be the case you will not hesitate in relinquishing the Contract, if this happens I have empowered Mr Munro to make arrangements immediately for carrying the Mails on the former establishment and I must request you will employ your Boats until he is prepared to enter upon the business on the part of the public. Your regard for the reputation of the department and a proper sense of the Confidence I have reposed in you will induce you to use every means in your power to prevent failures until a regular estab- lishment can be adopted by Mr Munro.—The Contractor between Pittsburg is directed to deliver the mail at Wheeling at 12 0 Clock on Saturday22 noon Iam&c J H THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO FRANCIS DE HEBECOURT [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. F] [Post Office Department] March 17, 1797 Francis D'Hebecourt Sir The failures in carrying the mail on the Ohio since the con- tract was put into Mr Greens hands, induce me to conclude that it is impracticable to carry it regularly in the manner contemplated by Mr Green. On that consideration I have desired him to relinquish his contract—if he does Mr Munro (Postmaster at Marietta will immediately notify you of it. When you receive such information from Mr Munro, I wish you to procure what is necessary, and employ boatmen to carry the mail as it was carried the last year. For the expences attending it you can be reimbursed as heretofore. Should Mr Green not relinquish his contract, it will be unnecessary for you to take any steps in the business. Perhaps the mail might now be carried by land with more expedi- tion and regularity than by water; if that should be the case and Mr Green relinquishes his contract, I wish you to have it carried either by water or land as you think will be most useful to the publick. I wish you to inform me what attention has been paid to the car- riage of the mail by those employed since the contract was placed in Mr Greens hands Mr Craig23 received a commission of five per cent on the monies expended by him in the carriage of the Ohio mail, for his agency in » See the Postmaster General to Greene, Apr. 21, 1797, post, p. 603. »» Maj. Isaac Craig.
Page 597
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 597 the business. The same rate of commission on the monies you have laid out in the business will be allowed you when you shall forward your account for the purpose.24 J. H. ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [MHS: Pickering Papers :ALS] Cincinnati 26th March 1797 Dear Sir I have written unto you so very much without knowing whether or not the same might be acceptable that I should not again so soon intrude but for a new Subject— a Mr Hamilton, formerly of New York and in the mercantile Line, where Report says he disgraced himself in some commercial Transac- tions is here avowedly an agent of the Spanish Government & successfully inviting our Citizens to migrate to the western shores of the Mississippi25— I know not if there be any way in which I could or should endeavour to check such proceeding but at the same time I trust Sir you will not take amiss my Information— when I was at Detroit Sir, the Inhabitants committed to me a Petition to Congress which I took the Liberty to enclose to your address requesting you would cause the same to be presented 29—I am asked Sir whether the same has been laid before them & take Leave to to request you would be so obliging as to enable me to make response— I have the honour to be Dear Sir with most respectful Esteem your obedient humble Srl W Sargent honble Col Pickering [Addressed] private Honhle Col Pickering Secretary of State Philadelphia [Endorsed] Winthrop Sargent Cincinnati March 26.1797 recd May 5 A petition he formerly inclosed from the inhabitants of Detroit—Asks if it has been presented to Congress 2« See the Postmaster General to de Hebecourt, June 23, 1797, post, p. 610. K See the Secretary of State to Sargent, June 30, 1797, post, p. 611; Harrison to the Secretary of State, Aug. 13, 1797, McHenry Papers (LC). M Not found. See the Secretary of State to St. Clair, Sept. 18, 1797, post, p. 629; petition of Sept. 2, 1800, post, III, 103.
Page 598
598 TERRITORIAL PAPERS RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta April 1" 1797 Sir Your favors of the 14th 27 and 17th Ult28 was received by the last Mail.—I have attended to there Contents and shall endeavor to put the business of the surveys &c. in proper train as soon as may be. I have the honor to be with much respect Sir your most Obedient Servent Rufus Putnam Honb1 Oliver Wollcott Esqr P. S. I will thank you Sir, to forward me as soon as may be, a Copy of Gen1 Waynes Treaty, so far as respects the duty of my Department.— [Addressed] Honh1 Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury Philadelphia N° 2 [Endorsed] N° 2 Marietta April 1" 1797 Rufus Putnam relative to Surveys Answd 14th of same month Recorded PETITION TO THE SENATE BY INHABITANTS OF GALLIPOLIS [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:AD] [April, 1797] To The Honourable the Speaker & Members of the Senate of the United States in Congress The Petition of Stephen Monnot, Lewis Anthony Carpentier Lewis Vimont, Francis Valton, Lewis Philip Ach9 Fichon, Anthony Ma- quet, Margareth G. C. Champagne Wife of Peter Anthy Laforge, Maria J. Dalliez, Wife of Peter Luc, all inhabitants of Gallipolis humbly Sheweth.29 That by untoward events and unlucky Circumstances they are deprived of their Share in the Tract of Land, granted by the Honour- able Congress in the Year 1795 to the Several inhabitants of that Settlement; their individual Applications verbally or by Writing to some Members of Congress in Order to obtain redress, having re- mained till now without effect; they take this present Mode to state the reasons, upon which they ground their request. They hope that the same reasons of Justice and benevolence which have actuated the Honourable Congress in 1795, in granting a Tract of Land to each of the inhabitants of that Settlement as a Sort of indimmfication for the severe disappointment they have experienced in their purchase from "Ante, p. 591. M Not found. » See Savary to Senator Brown, Jan. 6, 1798, post, p. 637.
Page 599
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 599 the Scioto Company, will induce the present Honourable Congress to grant them the same quantity of Land as to those who have shared in that former grant. Your Petitioners do not mean to blame or criticize the mode adopted at that time, to divide the Tract granted between all those only who should appear personally on a certain day on the Spot, excluding all those absent at that time; but they have at least the right to lament the effect of that regulation; they would wish that that vigorous exclusion had applied only to those established in some other parts of the Union, or in foreign Countries, or who on Account of their easy Circumstances had relinquished all Idea of Settlement on that very Spott, and that some Provision might be made, in favor of those, whom this Act meant chiefly to relieve, who were in the number of the first Petition, and who were unable from imperious Circumstances to attend on the very day appointed. Your Petitioners hope that the reasons of their remissnes on that day, together with the Certificate of the time they have resided at Gallipolis, which are hereunto annexed, & submitted to the Considera- tion of the Honourable the Senate will obtain from them a favourable decision; they therefore pray, that You will grant to each of them, adjoining if possible the former Grant, the same Quantity of Land (216 Acres), which has been granted to those who attended the day fixed by Law, and as in duty bound they will ever pray &c* Stephen Monot is the Same who came first from Gallipolis to Phila- delphia in Order to petition Congress, he went to France in Order to bring his Wife with him to establish themselves on his Land, the Vessel having put back twice, prevented his being at Gallipolis on the day of the division of the Tract. Lewis Anthy Carpentier was employed in the public Works at Presquisle at that very time. Lewis Vimont having lost his father when in Gallipolis and being an Orphan came in 1796 to Washington County in Pennsylvania to go to the School, he was Sick at the time of the division of the Land & the dryness of the Season has prevented his going down some weeks only after the appointed day Francis Valton was Soldier in the federal Army under General Wayne at the time appointed at Gallipolis. Lewis Philip A. Fichon was absent since the Year 1792, to provide for his Sustenance Anthony Maguet has not attained the age required by the Act of Grant, but is now Eighteen Years Old. Margareth Laforge has always resided at Gallipolis, but has been excluded by the Absence of her husband, who had purchased & really paid all the Amount to the Scioto Company.
Page 600
600 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Maria Luc is in the same predicament as above having always resided there & being excluded by the Absence of her husband.— [Endorsed] Legis: 2d Sess. 5th Cong. Petition of Stephen Monnot and others, inhabitants of Gallipolis, praying for a grant of Land. February 1" 1798. Petition of some inhabitants of Gallipolis. [Enclosures] Affidavit of Stephen Monnot and others of Gallipolis [April 5, 1797] Nous Soussignés Certifions par ces Presentes que le citoyen Etienne Monnot a residé dans cette ville depuis le mois d'octobre de l'anneé 1790 Jusqu'au mois de Juin 1794. Et depuis le mois de Janvier 1796 Jusqu'a a jour—. que le citoyen louis antoine Carpentier a residé ici depuis le mois d'octobre 1790 Jusqu'au mois de Mai 1793 Et depuis le mois de Janvier 1796 Jusqua a jour. que le citoyen Louis vimont a reside ici depuis le mois d'octobre 1790 Jusqu'au mois de fevrier 1795. que le citoyen francois valton a residé depuis le mois d'octobre 1790 Jusqu'a dans le courant de 1794— que le Citoyen louis Philipe achille Fichon a residé ici depuis le mois d'octobre 1790 Jusqu'en 1792— que Margueritte gabrielle Colombe Champagne Epouse de pierre antoine Laforge a residé a Gallipolis depuis la Fin de l'année 1790 Jusqu'a jour que Marie Josephine—Dalliez Epouse de Pierre Luc a residé ici depuis la fin de l'anne 1790 Jusqu'a a Jour— En foi de quoi nous avons Signé ces Presentes pour Servir a valoir que de raison Gallipolis le cinquieme Jour d'avril 1797 P. Bureau F,b D'hébécourt C. Etienne A. B. Duc Lambert W DeVacht Robt Lafforet Justice Peace Translation30 We the undersigned certify by the present that the citizen Stephen Monnot has resided in this town Since the month of october of the year 1790. till the month of June 1794. and Since the month of Janry 1796 till this day. that the citizen Anthony Carpentier has resided here Since the month of october 1790 till the month of may 1793. and Since the month of January 1796. till this day. that the citizen Lewis Vimont has resided here Since the month of october 1790. till the month of february 1795. s° Xhis and the following translation are contemporary, having been submitted with the original petition.
Page 601
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 601 That the citizen francis Valton has resided here Since the month of october 1790 till the end of the year 1794. That the citizen Lewis achille Phil Fichon has resided here Since the month of october 1790 till the year 1792. That the citizenne Margt Gabl,e Colombe Champagne Wife of Peter anty. Laforge has resided here Since the end of the year 1790 till this day. That the citizenne Marie Josephine Dalliez wife of Peter Luc has resided here Since the end of the year 1790 till this day. in testimony of which we have Signed the present to be made use according reason & law Gallipolis this fifth day of april 1797. P. Bureau Fc" D'Hebecourt C. Estienne A. B. Due Lambert W DeVacht Robt Laforest I Justice of peace) Affidavit for Antoine Maquet of Gallipolis [April 4, 1797] Nous certifions que Antoine Maquet, fils de Pierre Robert Maguet est habitant de Gallipolis Comté Washington depuis Six annees, qu'il n'a qu participe au don de terre fait par le Congres aux habitans de la Susdt Ville de Gallipolis attenda qu'il n'avoit pas l'age requis par la loi quil S'en falloit de pou [MS. illegible] a qu'il a reellement dix huit ann accomplis maintenant. Enfin de quoi nous avons signé le present certificat. Fait a Gallipolis a quatre avril 1797 FRANCOIS D'HEbECOURT A. B. Due P Bureau Robt Lafforet Justice Peace Translation We the undersigned certify that Anthony Maguet Son of Peter Robert Maguet is one of inhabitant of Gallipolis Washington County Since six years that he has not participated to the gift of Land granted by Congress to the inhabitants of Gallipolis Whereas he had not yet the age required by the law. and that he has now eighteen years ac- complished in testimony of which we have delivered the present certificate to be made use according reason & law. Gallipolis this 4th april 1797 FoU D'Hebecourt A B Due Robt Laforest Justice of peace P Bureau
Page 602
G02 TERRITORIAL PAPERS RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO: Div. E, SG, 1790-1816:C] Marietta April 8th 1797. Oliver Wolcott jun. Esqr Secretary of the Treasury Sir On the first instant31 I acknowledged the receipt of your's of the 14th 32 & 17th 33 ultimo—Agreeably to the 11th article of Instructions I inform you that on the fifth instant—I drew an order on the Treasurer in favor of William Skinner for three hundred and seventy five Dol- lars—I have written to Capt Israel Ludlow inviting him to undertake the survey of the Indian boundary from Muskingum to Larimies Store,—I shall be prepared for the Agents of the Moravian people whenever they arrive 34—I have made provision, for employing six Surveyors, in running out the Military Lands; as soon as the survey of the Indian boundary is complete.— Your directions respecting transcripts of oaths &c to be taken by the Assistant Surveyors and Chain Carriers will be observed; but the Law appears not to have authorised (at least not expressly) the Assistant Surveyors to administer the necessary oaths or affirmation to the Chain-Carriers; which it appears absolutely necessary they should be empowered to do, because by reason of sickness or accidents these Men are liable to be taken off from service, and the business stop; or the Surveyor must supply himself with others when probably he's at a great distance from the Surveyor General or any Magistrate whatever—and therefore out of his power to have them sworn unless he does it himself—from these circumstances I conceive the propriety of the Assistant Surveyors possessing this power must appear very reasonable; it ever has been the practice where I have been con- cerned—I shall therefore until otherwise directed instruct my Assist- ants to administer the necessary oaths & affirmation to their Chain Carriers. I have the honor &c &c "R. P. Exd »1 Ante, p. 598. »2 Artie, p. 591. "Not found. ** See the Secretary of State to Putnam, Mar. 17, 1797, Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 418-419; Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, May 18, 1797, post, p. 606.
Page 603
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 603 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E.SG, 1790-1816 :C] Treasury Department April 14th 1797 Rufus Putnam Esqr Surveyor General &c Sir In pursuance of the request contained in your Letter of the first instant—I now transmit to you a Copy of General Wayne's Treaty with the Indians on the third of August 1795.36 I am &c &c 0. W. Secy THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO CHARLES GREENE [PO: P.M. Letter Bk. F] [Post Office Department] April 21" 1797 Charles Greene Esqr SIR Your favor of the 2nd Instant89 was received the Post before the last; the Pittsburg Mail which arrived yesterday brought nothing from Kentucky or the North Western Territory how this failure has happened I cannot at present say but I am rather inclined to think the Mail was not delivered at Wheeling in time for the Pittsburg Rider. It is more than probable that some of the failures of the Ohio Mail have been occasioned by the irregular Conduct of the Riders at each end of the water route but similar irregularities were experi- enced under the former arrangement for carrying that Mail without producing such delays and failures as have occurred since the Contract has been in your hands You were to have employed four Boats on the whale Boat construction each Navigated with two hands and from your Letter to me I had every reason to conclude that such Boats were used in the conveyance of that Mail and found to answer exceed- ingly well—in yours of the 21" of November38 you observe that you have directed some to be built on that plan and in your Letters of a later date you mention "that the Boats employed by you will answer much better than any we have ever had on these waters"—After this information I was much surprised to hear from Gallipolis that no Boats on the new Construction were employed between that Place & Preston and from another quarter as you will find by the enclosed Extract of a Letter dated the 16 th of March last that the Mail is entrusted to a Boy of 14 Years old in a small Canoe between Little Sandy and Preston. I will add Sir that this is confirmed in a letter I also received from the Post Master at Washington so that the fact is too well ascertained to admit of a doubt—Can it be supposed that « Answered May 6, 1797, post, p. 605. M Not found.
Page 604
604 TERRITORIAL PAPERS such a boy—is a proper Person to be entrusted with a Mail in a Canoe which cannot possibly live when the winds are high? Is an open Box or Blankett in such a Boat a Proper receptacle for the Mail? and is it a matter of any surprise if failures happen when a Boy of fourteen has to push a Canoe fifty miles against the stream?—To convince you that the Boatmen employed do not do their duty I know of one Instance lately when they did not even go from Galli- polis with the Mail for Kentucky—Under such circumstances I can only make you a partial payment of Four Hundred Dollars—This sum is in four Post Notes of One Hundred Dollars each Payable 30 Days after date to your self of the following Numbers 1445,1446,1447,1448, You will be pleased to sign the receipt accompanying the notes and return it to this Office—If Boats on the whale Boat Construction are not procured for the lower Stations I must request that you will im- mediately have them built or purchased for the Department with proper Boxes fixed in the Boats and covered with Oil Cloth Mr Munroe at Marietta can certainly furnish the necessary Portmanteaus and he may retain the Balance of his present quarters account towards de- fraying the Expence thereof.—Whenever I am convinced that you have performed your Engagements with the Publick by carrying the Mail in a proper and regular manner which you must have it in your Power to prove by authentic and satisfactory vouchers I will Pay you the full sum stipulated in your Contract but with the Information I am possessed of at present I must in Justice to the Public retain as much of your Pay as will cover all the Penalties you appear to have in- curred for Failures I am &c. J. H. The Pay of Eight men employed by the Agents of the Department under the former arrangement amounted including a Ration and a half a day pr man to Fifteen Hundred & Eighty four Dollars a Year which leaves a Balance of Fourteen Hundred & Sixteen Dollars a year in your favor and is without doubt one of the best Contracts in the Depart- ment if not the best—The following is the Extract alluded too in the foregoing letter. Extract of a Letter from Mr John Graham at Pres- ton Dated March 16th 97—"Our Mail is carried in such a careless irregular manner that the frequent miscarriage of Letters is to be ex- pected—By the by I wish you would speak to the Post M General on this subject—Mr Greene who has contracted to carry the Mail between this place and Wheeling certainly has not complyed with the spirit of his Contract I should not suppose that the P M. G. would be willing to trust the Mail to a small Boy about 14 Years Old and yet such a one takes it from this place in an open Box, until the last trip in a Blank- ett, to Mr Gervais, from thence to Gallipolis I am told it has a sim- ilar conveyance—we have not received a Single Mail in due time."38 88 See the Postmaster General to Greene, Mar. 17, 1797, ante, p. 595.
Page 605
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 605 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta May 6th 1797 SiR— Your favor of the 14th ult enclosing a copy of Gen1 Waynes treaty with the Indians has been receiv'd 39—I drew an Order this day, on the treasurer of the United States for two hundred & twenty dollars in favour of Dudley Woodbridge—Genl Wilkinson when on his way down the River, (a few days since) informed me that the Indians were invited by him to be at GreeneVill—the 20th Instant—to attend Run- ning the boundary line of the reason which induced Genl Wilkinson to this measure I am Ignorant and for which I cannot account—because agreeably to your instructions—I was to "inform him when & where I should be ready to comence running the line" And he must know that it was very uncertain whither the Surveyor could be procured, and in readiness by that time—However that nothing should be wanting on my part—that is possible to be effected I have forwarded to Capt Ludlow the necessary powers & instructions for executing the Survey of the Indian boundary from Fort Recovery to Lorimies Store, and from thence to the Muskingum—presuming that he would under- take the bussiness; althoe I had had no answer to my letters to him on that subject—written soon after the receiving your instructions of the fourteenth of March—should Capt Ludlow agree to go forward with the Survey—as I trust he will it will be so far well; but with respect to making the line in a proper manner—according to what appears to me necessary—it is doubtfull if any thing will be done, unless Genl Wilkinson should receive some instructions on that head, from the Secretary of War—the enclosed copy of my letter to Gen1 Wilkinson 40 will explain the reason of my doubts—in addition to which I would observe that the Genl. said if the troops were to labour they ought to be paid to be paid for it—However if Capt Ludlow agrees to under- take the bussiness he will mark the line in the Usual Manner, and a party may at any time, hereafter; open a vestage of such a width as Goverment should think proper to direct— I have the honour to be with much respect Sir Your Obt Sevt— Rufus Putnam The Honb" Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of Treasury [Endorsed] N° 4 May 6th 1797 Rufus Putnam Surveyor General enclosing a copy of his Letter to General Wilkinson, Answered May 19. 179741 Recorded - Ante, p. 603. "Apr. 28, 1797 (GLO). "Post, p. 607.
Page 606
606 TERRITORIAL PAPERS RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta May ye 18th 1797— Sir I herewith enclose a certificate made by Judge Woodbridge of my having taken the necessary oaths, to qualify me for executing the office of Surveyor Genl.,42 the reason why it is of so late a date; it may be proper to explain: on my appointment in October last—I was sworn before Judge Symmes who certified on the back of the Commission—an appointment was afterward made with the Advice of Senate and a new Commission issued, on receiving of which it did not immediately occur to me that it was necessary I should be again sworn into Office43—. I enclose transcripts of the Oath administered to Martin & Biggs; two of my Deputies, and of the Contract made with them for the survey of a part of the Military Land44—Capt Ludlow has agreed to survey the Indian boundary line from Fort Recovery to Lorimies Store, and from thence to the Muskingum River, he writes me that he shall be ready by the 20th instt he is instructed to make his way to the Muskingum by estimated courses, according to the best of his Judgment "to have each course measured with great exactness as well as run with much care, that his calculation for the true course may be as correct as possible, and having erected a very conspicuous monument at the point or station assigned by the Treaty, he will run the true course back seting a post at the end of every Mile and blaizing the line in the usual manner"— If Capt. Ludlow meets with no delay from the Indians I expect he will reach the crossing place above Fort Laurence about the first of July— Whither Gen1 Wilkinson will furnish a party of axe men to open a Vestage or not I am not informed but sure I am that it is a matter of no small consequence that it should be done— Martin and Biggs are ordered to Commence their Survey by the tenth of June—they will begin at the Northwest corner of the Seven Ranges and are not to cross the Muskingum, untill Capt Ludlow commences running the true line from thence toward Lorimies Store— The Agents of the Moravian Society have arived in this Country4S I expect to have the Survey of their lands commence about the tenth of June shall myself be on the spot to determine the location and from thence go up the river to meet Capt Ludlow at the crossing above Fort Lawrence—I have divided the Military tract into five districts— Martin & Biggs have the two eastern as per Copy of the Contract « May 9, 1797 (GLO). ** See Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 25, 1797, ante, p. 588. « May 9, 1797 (GLO). « See Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 591.
Page 607
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 607 enclosed Mr Matthews46 from the County of Hamilton I expect will have the North Middle district at three dollars per mile & a Mr Jack- son from Harrison County in Virginia is agreed with for the south Middle District at two dollars & an half per mile—but the contract is not yet executed, Capt Ludlow is to have the west District at three dollars p Mile—If no misfortune happens I trust the Survey of the whole will be compleat, and plans returned into your office by the first of January next— In your favor of the 14th of March47 you informed me that you had directed a standard chain to be prepared—and the Register of the Treasury—to transmit a few blank books suitable for the records of the field notes—and a quantity of paper on which the plats of Town- ships are to be protracted—the blank books have arrived, but the chain has not, nor have I heard any thing of the paper which will be much wanted—a paper of a suitable quality for such plans cannot be procure'd here— I have the honour to be with Great esteem Sir your most obedt Servent— Rufus Putnam Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of Treasury NB May 20th drew an order on the treasurer of the United States in favor of Dudley Woodbridge for one hundred dollars— [Endorsed] N° 5 Marietta May 18th 1797 Rufus Putnam—Surveyor Gen1 Recorded inclosing the oaths of the depy Surveyor's THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E,SG, 1790-1816 :C] Treasury Department May 19th 1797 Rufus Putnam Esqr Surveyor General Sir I have received your Letter of May 6th 48 and now enclose a Copy of the Letter of the Secretary of War to General Wilkinson dated March 18th 49 which you will see is conformable to what was contained in my instructions. I shall state to the Secretary the doubt which has arisen, which I presume he will obviate. I am &c 0. W. E& "John Matthews, nephew of Rufus Putnam; surveyor of the Seven Ranges, 1785-1787; surveyor of the military district, 1798; member of the Ohio Senate, 1820 (Hulbert, ed., Recs. Ohio Company, I, 26). « Ante, p. 591. 48 Ante, p. 605. » Not found.
Page 608
608 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO CHARLES GREENE [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. F] [Post Office Department] May 26th 1797 Mr Charles Greene Sir. I am favored with your Letter of the 7th 51 Instant in reply to mine of the 27. Ult°51 and enclosing a Letter from Mess" Meigs and Bureau62 relative to their Conduct as your agents for conveying the Mail from Gallipolis to Preston. It is in vain to deny the want of method or Exertion in conducting the business committed to your charge as scarcely a Mail arrives without bringing an account of some failures on the River. A Gentleman from Washington informs me in a Letter dated the 3rd Instant which I received by the last Post "That the Canoe which plies between Preston and Mr Gervas returned the week before the last without any Mail, after having waited the expiration of their time." and adds that there is very great mis- management on the River. Notwithstanding I had every Reason for stopping a very large proportion of your pay for the last quarter, to stimulate you to proper exertions in addition to the Sum I forwarded you of Four Hundred Dollars63 Mr Wager was paid 250 Dollars more on your draft in his favor. I will however send on by the next Post an account of the failures and penalties you have incurred in consequence of them which will be deducted from your pay that become due on the 30th of June next unless you can offer satisfactory excuses for them Will you be so good as to answer the following Questions. Is the Mail carried in four Boats from Wheeling to Preston, and which are the Stations? Are the Boats built on the Whale Boat Construction, and navigated with two active able men each? Are Boxes fixed to the Boats for the reception of the Mails and are the Mails conveyed in Portmanteaus secured with Locks? I will thank you to be particular in answering these Questions by return of Post General Wilkinson and the Secretary of War have both complained of the careless manner of conveying the Mail on the Ohio I mention this to convince you that the complaints are from all Quarters; they are much too general to admit of the Insinuation of Mess" Meigs and Bureau that they originate with interested persons who are desirous of taking the business out of their hands.64 I am &c J. H. II Not found. "P. Bureau, of Gallipolis. M See the Postmaster General to Greene, Apr. 21, 1797, ante, p. 604. M See the Postmaster General to de Hebecourt, June 23, 1797, post, p. 610.
Page 609
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 609 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta June y" 1" 1797— Sir Your favor of the 19th ultimoS5 was receiv'd by the last Mail, the standard chain arrived, the week before: I drew an Order on the Treasurer, dated this day, for one hundred dollars, in favour of Wm Skiner—The enclos'd is a Copy of the Oath—taken and sub- scribed by Wm Rufus Putnam a Deputy Surveyor—to morrow I set out with him to survey the Moravian lands,56 from whence I shall proceed to the Tuskarawa's fork, to meet Capt Ludlow— I am with great esteem, Sir your obedient Servent— Rufus Putnam The Honb" Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury [Addressed] The Honb1 Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasurer of the United States at Philadelphia [Endorsed] N° 6 Marietta June 1" 1797 Rufus Putnam S. Gen1 Recorded transmitting a Copy of an oath ISRAEL LUDLOW TO RUFUS PUTNAM 67 [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :C] Forks of a Creek near Loromies June 15th 1797— Dear Sir—I have been waiting with my party since the first inst. for the Escort & the Indians I shall wait three days longer after which, if the Indians do not collect, I move on to Tuscarawas with my party accompanied by a small Escort of twelve men—I expect no Indians except a few Shawonoes & some Delawares—the other nations have either not had timely notice, not pleased with the operation or think it of too trifling consequence to claim their Notice68 I hope we shall succeed in our efforts in getting through with our line—but the provision for cutting it is by no means adequate to the Service— only five men are employ'd to cut the road through—the season of the year, the state of our provision; the wages annext to the Service all unite to urge forward as expeditiously as possible—cannot therefore wait for the cutting of the Road, but shall be able to mark it very well—I have hopes of seeing you at Tuscarawas & being able to procure flour from you but fearing some disappointment, I shall » Ante, p. 607. M See act of June 1, 1796, 1 Stat. 490-491; the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 592; Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury May 18, 1797, ante, p. 606. "Enclosed in Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury July 22,1797, post, p. 614. "See Vanderburgh to Sargent, June 13, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS). 126650—34 40
Page 610
610 TERRITORIAL PAPERS drive two or three small cattle to furnish ourselves with provision—I shall endeavour to get to Tuscarawas—by the 10th of July—find the Gnats & Mosketoes a very great affliction. Am with much respect your Obt Mt Servt— Israel Ludlow.— Rufus Putnam Esqr [Endorsed] Recorded Copy Israel Ludlow to Rufus Putnam THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO FRANCIS DE HEBE- COURT [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. F] General Post Office Philad* 23d June 1797 Francis D'Hebecourt esqr Sir I am favored with your Letter of the 6 Instant59 and am glad to find that the Mail is now regularly carried on the Ohio.60 Mr Greene informs me that he could not get Boats built on the Whale Boat Construction but he says they are built from one stick of good Timber from which I conclude they are Canoes. Will you be so good as to inform me whether Canoes are in use between Preston and Gallipolis how many boats are employed on that part of the river and the number of hands in each boat? and what such Boats may be purchased for? Is there a good Box, covered with Tarr and Oil Cloth so as to make it water tight fixed in the Boat from Gallipolis to the first lower Station, and do you understand that the Mail is secured in the same manner from thence to Prestons? I wish you to be particular in answering these Questions and will thank you for the earliest Information on the Subject I am very sorry that you have been so long kept out of the balance due from this Office. Mr Burral thinks you did not require its being sent to you before your last Letter. he now transmits the balance in Post Notes, and you will observe that I have allowed you five pr Cent Commission on the whole Sum you paid the Boatmen as that business was out of the line of your duty as a Post Master.81 I am &c J. H » Not found. 60 See the Postmaster General to Munroe, Greene, and de Hebecourt, Mar. 17, 1797, ante, pp. 594 et seq. 81 See Burrall to William St. Clair, Dec. 14, 1797, post, p. 633.
Page 611
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 611 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [SD:Dom. Letters, X:C] Department of State June 30.1797. Winthrop Sargent Esqr Sir I have received your private letter of the 3d instant,62 and read it to the President of the United States. He thinks it important to adopt the idea you suggest, that you should immediately proceed to the settlements on the Eastern Bank of the Mississippi, above the Ohio "to put the militia in the best possible State". You know that he has not the power to confirm the untitled settlers in their posses- sions: but I am authorized to assure you, that he is disposed to quiet them, and to recommend their cases favourably to Congress. But by their fidelity to the United States, they cannot fail to recommend themselves: such fidelity as circumstances now call for, cannot pass unrewarded. The journey will occasion an expense which ought to be borne by the public. The President asked what would be necessary: I could not determine: but I assured him of your economy and good management. I leave it to yourself to draw on me for the requisite sum 63 I have the satisfaction to say that you possess the President's confidence.64 With sincere respect and esteem I am, Dear Sir, your obedient servantr ___ Timothy Pickering. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Pickering Papers:LPC] (private) Philadelphia June 30.1797. Dear Sir, In addition to what is said in my public letter, I think it my duty to intimate to you, that there is too much ground to think that we have internal enemies—disposed to favour the views of France and Spain—perhaps to detach the whole western country from the United States. Shall I entrust you then to be on the watch for every symptom of discontent, for every act, for every speech, for every cir- cumstance, which indicates a design injurious to the union. Such a conspiracy must have conspicuous men for leaders; and such demand the closest observation." I am very truly yours T. Pickering Col° Winthrop Sargent. 82 Not found. ■ See the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury, Oct. 16, 1797, post, p. 632. M Answered Aug- 5, 1797, pott, p. 618. M See Sargent to the Secretary of State, Mar. 26, 1797, ante, p. 597.
Page 612
612 TERRITORIAL PAPERS PROCLAMATION CREATING ADAMS COUNTY [OHS:Sargent Papers:ADS] [July 10, 1797] Territory of the United States Northwest of the river Ohio By Winthrop Sargent acting as Governour— [L. s.] To all persons unto whom these Presents shall come. Greeting Whereas by an Ordinance of Congress bearing Date—the thirteenth of July one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven for the Settle- ment of the Territory of the United States Northwest of the river Ohio it has been provided that for the due Execution of Process civil and criminal the Governour shall make proper Division of the said Terri- tory and proceed from Time to time as Circumstances may require to lay out the parts of the same into Counties and Townships And whereas it has been represented to me that the population in the County of Hamilton has so increased as to render a Division thereof necessary, for the purposes before mentioned 68—And that a new County should be erected, including therein some of the Lands appetaining to Washington County—Now know ye therefore—That in Virtue of the powers vested in me by the United States, I do by these Presents order and Ordain (any Ordinances of the Governour hereto- fore published notwithstanding) that all and singular the Lands lying and being within the following Boundaries Viz: Beginning, upon the Ohio river at the upper Boundary of that Tract of twenty four thousand acres of Land granted unto the French inhab- itants of Gallipolis by an Act of the Congress of the United States bearing Date the third of March one thousand seven hundred and ninety five—thence down the said Ohio river to the mouth of Elk river (generally known by the name of Eagle Creek) and up with the principal Water of the said Elk river or Eagle Creek to its Source or head—thence by a due north Line to the Southern Boundary of Wayne County and easterly along said Boundary so far that a due South Line shall meet the interior point of the upper Boundary of the aforesaid Tract of Land of twenty four thousand Acres, and with said boundary to the place of Beginning Shall be a County Named and hereafter to be known and called by the Name of the County of adams-—which said County of Adams shall have and enjoy all and singular the Jurisdictions, rights, Liberties and "See Nathaniel Massie to Sargent, May 1, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS), embodying recommendations as to the boundary of the proposed new county and enclosing a petition from settlers in the vicinity of Brush Creek relative to the location of the county seat. The enclosure is in the same collection. See also, Joe. cit., petitions of July 27 relative to the seat of government from four other centers in the same county, signed respectively by 209, 126, 35, and 15 different persons. See also, Joe. cit., Worthington to Sargent, Apr. 22 and May 8, 1798, and James Scott to Sargent, Apr. 30, 1798.
Page 613
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 613 Immunities whatsoever to a County appertaining, and which any County that now is, or hereafter may be erected and Laid off shall or ought to enjoy Conformably to the ordinance of Congress before mentioned—. In Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the public Seal this tenth Day of July a.d. one Thousand seven hundred and ninety seven and of the Independence of the United States the twenty second 67— Winthrop Sargent [Endorsed] Ord. erecting the county of Adams ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE SURVEYOR GENERAL AND JOHN G. JACKSON 68 [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :C] [July 12, 1797] Articles of agreement, Indented, had, made, concluded and fully agreed upon the Twelveth day of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety seven, Between Rufus Putnam of Marietta in the County of Washington & Teritory Northwest of the River ohio, surveyor General of the United States, of the one part: and George Jackson and John G Jackson of the County of Harrison in the State of Virginia; of the other part—Witnesseth That for and in Consideration of the Condi- tions, terms, provisos and Covenants herein after mentioned, and according to the true intent and Meaning of them; the said George Jackson in behalf of and as surety for his son the said John G Jackson (now a minor) with the said John G Jackson: Deputy Surveyor do hereby Covenant and agree with the said Putnam in his capacity afore- said; that he the said John G Jackson will Faithfully and accurately Lay out and survey; protract and make return to the said Putnam, agreably to the Laws of the United States, and such Plans and instruc- tions as have and shall be furnished him by the said Putnam A Certain part or portion of that tract of Country described in an act of Congress of the First of June 1796 entitled, "An Act Regulateing the Grants of Lands appropriated for Military services" &c &c viz the south midle District as delineated in a plan of the said tract of Country, furnished by the said Putnam, which district consists of Twenty four Townships of five mile square: being the first four or southern Townships in the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, & Tweveth Ranges and are Numbered from one to four (inclusive) in each of those Ranges.— "See under same date, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 472. M Enclosed in Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, July 29, 1797, post, p. 616.
Page 614
614 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Except the southern and Eastern boundary Lines of said district; for the survey of which—Martin and Biggs have Contracted— Which Survey protraction and Return it is agreed shall be made and compleated with in four months from the date hereof, unless prevented by Indian hostilities— Further more the said George and John G Jackson covenant that should any Errors be committed or Neglects take place in the in the execution of the work the said Putnam shall have Right to Cause the same to be rectified at the expence of the said George and John G Jackson— And the said Putnam covenants and engages that on the complea- tion of the work, there shall be paid on account of the United States as a full Compensation for the whole expence in surveying, protracting and makeing the Necessary plans and returns included: the rate or proportion of Two Dollars and Fifty Cents per mile, for every mile and part of a mile actually run with the Compass and Measured with the Chain agreably to Law and the Plans and instructions of the said Putnam— Further more it is agreed that the said John G Jackson shall or may make out his account of servis Quarter yearly agreably to the System of the Treasury department which the said Putnam Covenants to [pay] in Cash at Marietta or by bills on the Treasurer of the United States— In Witness whereof the parties to these Indentures have Inter- changably set their hands and seals the day and year within first Written Signed Sealed and Delivered In presence of George Jackson (l.s.) David Davison John G Jackson (l.s.) Wm Rufus Putnam Rufus Putnam (l.s.) Copy attest Rufus Putnam S G RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta July 22? 1797 Sir I herewith forward to you, Plats of three tracts of land survey'd at Schoenbrunn, Gnadenhutten, and Salem,'9 agreeably to the 5th Section of the Act of Congress entitled "An Act regulating the grants of land, appropriated, for Military services: and for the Society of United Bretheren for propigating the Gospel among the Heathen "70 « Not found. » Act of June 1, 1796, 1 Stat. 490-491.
Page 615
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 615 The Survey of the Military townships within which these lands fall not being complete, it is not in my power at present to point out their Local situation with respect to the Ranges & Townships with which they are connected—It may be proper to observe that the Compasses of all the Surveyors employ'd in running out the Military land, are rectifi'd to the west boundary line of the Seventh Range of Townships, as the Meridian or North & South line; parellel to which all the North & South lines will be run, and the East & West lines at right angles therewith untill we arrive at the Scioto; this method I conceive to be compatible with the Laws, and by which a great many slips of land, and fractions of Townships are prevented which would unavoidably have existed, had the method of running by the true Meridian been adopted, and for the same reason I shall not attempt to run the North and South lines on a true meridian between the Ohio Companies land and the Scioto but by lines parallel to former Surveys—the true Meridian will however be obtained in diverse parts of the Surveys in the most exact manner possible, which will be laid down on the plat of each Township and the Variation noted— on the 2nd of July I arrived at the crossing of the Muskingum above Fort Laurence, but not finding nor hearing any thing of Capt Ludlow I marked the place for erecting the boundary agreeably to the treaty, left a letter for Capt Ludlow and the next day returned down to Gnadenhutten, and on the fourth of July I fell in with Capt Ludlow about five miles below Gnadenhutten—the enclosed copy of his letter of the 15th of June 71 will inform you of his delays situation & pros- pects up to that time I learned from him that he left the Fork of Miami below Loramies store the seventeenth of June, that a few yongerly Indians sent on (as they say,) by some of the chiefs had accompanied him all the way and behaved very well—unfortunately Capt Ludlow's estimated course Eastward brought him more than twenty miles South of the Crossing above Fort Laurenc, he would however make his northing to that place & be ready to commence running the true line by the tenth of July— In my tour up the Muskingum I had the pleasure of Mr Heckin- welers72 Company (the Moravian Agent) who speeks the Indian language perfectly, we found scatter'd Indians in diverse parts of the Country, planting & hunting, perfectly easy & quiet—they expressed their approbation of running the boundary line—and other surveys going on we saw however no person of any great consequence among them— The surveys of the Military land are in good train Martin & Biggs have been in the woods more than a month, Jacksons set out the 13th instant and Matthews starts next monday, Copies of Contracts with 71 Ante, p. 609. 72 John Heckewelder.
Page 616
616 TERRITORIAL PAPERS the two latter I shall forward by the next Mail—Ludlow will com- mence the survey of his Military district soon after he returns from compleating the boundary line—his distance from me and the haste to commence the survey of the Indian boundary, has and will prevent any evidence of a contract but what is contained in letters which have passed between us—a certificate of his being sworn as a Deputy Surveyor is enclosed73— I have the honor to be with great respect & esteem Sir your Obt Servent— Rufus Putnam Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury— [Endorsed] N° 7 July 22 1797—from General Rufus Putnam covering a copy of a Letter from Israel Ludlow & Certificate of his having taken the Oath required Recorded. Page 16 Surveyor Generals Book The Plats of the three Surveys within mentioned, were transmitted to the Register of the Treasury for Record September 22nd 1797 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta July 29tfc 1797 Sir My Last Letter was dated the 22d instent with which I forwarded Plans of three tracts of Land surveyed at Shoenbrunn, Gnaden-hutten & Salem, for the Moravian Society,—which ware secured in Paste-board cover, and I hope arrived in good order— I now forward you Copies of my Contracts with John Mathews74 & John G Jackson, for the Survey of the North and south midle dis- tricts of Military Lands: with Copies of the oaths they have taken as Deputy Surveyors I have the honour to be With great Respect Sir your obedient Servent Rufus Putnam S G Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury [Endorsed] N° 8 Marietta July 29th 1797 Rufus Putnam—Surveyor G1 Recorded in Surveyors G9 Book page 20.1.& 2 forwarding Copies of Contr" with John Mathews & John G. Jackson "May 20, 1797 (GLO). "July 22, 1797 (GLO).
Page 617
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 617 PROCLAMATION CREATING JEFFERSON COUNTY [OHS:Sargent Papers: ADS] [July 29, 1797] Territory of the United States Northwest of the river Ohio [L.S.] Winthrop Sargent acting as Governour To all Persons unto whom these Presents shall come Greeting Whereas by an Ordinance of Congress bearing Date the thirteenth of July one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven for the Settle- ment of the Territory of the United States Northwest of the river Ohio it has been provided that for the due Execution Process civil and criminal the Governour shall make proper Division of the said Territory and proceed from Time to Time as Circumstances may require to lay out the same into Counties & Townships— And Whereas it has been represented to me that the Population in Washington County has so increased as to render a Division thereof necessary for the purposes before mentioned—And that a new County should be erected and laid off Now know ye therefore—that in Virtue of the powers vested in me by the United States I do ordain by these Presents, that all and singular the Lands lying & and being within the followingBoundaries— Viz: Beginning upon the Bank of the Ohio river where the Western Boundary of Pennsylvania crosses it, and down the said river to the Southern Boundary of the Fourth Township in the third Range (of those seven ranges of Townships that were surveyed in Conformity to the Ordinance of Congress of the twentieth of May one thousand seven hundred and Eighty five) and with the said southern Boundary west to the South west Corner of the Sixth Township of the Fifth range—thence North along the western Boundary of the said Fifth Range to the Termination thereof; thence due west to the Muskingum river and up the same to, and with, the Portage between it and the Cayahoga river—thence down Cayahoga to Lake Erie—thence East- erly along the Shores of the Lake to the western Boundary of Penn- sylvania and South with the same to the Place of Beginning Shall be a County named and hereafter to be known and called by the Name of the County of Jefferson—which said County of Jefferson shall have and enjoy all and singular the jurisdictions, rights, Liber- ties and Immunities whatsoever to a County appertaining, and which any County that now is, or hereafter may be erected and laid off, shall or ought to enjoy conformably to the Ordinance of Congress before mentioned— In Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and affixed the public Seal at Steubenville in the County aforesaid this twenty
Page 618
618 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ninth Day of July a.d. one thousand seven hundred and ninety seven and of the Independence of the United States the twenty Second— Winthrop Sargent [Endorsed] of the Governour fixing the Boundaries of Jefferson County78 ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OHS: Sargent Papers:C] Marietta 5th of August 1797. This Day my Dear Sir upon my return from the Eastern Boundary of the Territory I am honored with your public and private letters of the 23d 77 and 30h78 of June forwarded from Cincinnati to this place— The objects of this tour have been already declared to you & in the south two new Counties are erected—Adams 79 & Jefferson 80 upon which I may now add that additional Copies of the United States Laws are more than ever necessary and laws & papers for which I have before written to you are essential and I ask the same with free- dom because the Acts of Congress have made the due provision I say nothing more at present upon these Counties because all the Infor- mation must be furnished with my periodical communications—it is proper however to observe the Territory is very fast peopling and with the Accessions of Inhabitants comes variety of Sentiment—the Division of the Government provided for should in the Ordinance therefore I humbly conceive very early take place and that future attention to the subdivision for States contemplated be fully and distinctly expressed in the very first act of Congress which shall cause easy alteration in our District—in the mean while Sir the Territory will have many imaginary and some real Causes of Complaint—I mention however only Sir our Want of Territorial Judges—you know the Law requires two to hold a Court—the Term passes off in many Counties without avail for the want thereof and there are very few Strangers to the Consequent Evils and I know nothing that can have stronger tendency to produce Disaffection to the United States than this Course—may I my Dear Sir request you to keep this matter in view—ere October Turner's place should be filled (excuse me for so strongly expressing myself) and by some character who would make the Duties of the office his primary Consideration81—In our county "See Journal Exec. Procs., same date, post, III, 476. 77 Pickering Papers (MHS). ™ Ante, p. 611. 78 July 10, 1797, ante, p. 612. 80 July 29, 1797, ante, p. 617. "Return Jonathan Meigs, Jr., of Marietta, was nominated judge of the territory, Feb. 9, 1797, and confirmed Feb. 12 (Senate, Exec. Journal, I, 261).
Page 619
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 619 Judge Symmes presence would be a mere nullity for in almost every civic Action of Consequence he must be virtually a party—but knowing your disposition to the public weal (in regard to which impartial as we may be deemed we are not without our Importance) I forbear to urge more— Nothing shall prevent my proceeding immediately to the Missis- sippi but the want of an escort which if the regular military can not supply I will endeavour to obtain from the militia—you will readily see that something should be said or done in reply to the Indian (Gray's) Speech relative to the Survey of the Donation Lots about Vincennes82 & if I should not hear from you I shall silently suspend the Business for the present but to check settlement upon Tracts surveyed may not be so easily effected— Upon my vigilance and Exertion to suppress & counteract the Invidious Designs of our Enemies you may at all Times rely—there can be no personal hazard I will not make and I have only to appre- hend for my reputation—you will be good enough to recollect my Dear Sir that I have a Diplomatic Character to risk and though in Time of Danger I should court the "Forlorn" yet I have about me the prudence of an old soldier—The Sons of the Duke of Orleans & others—Aliens or suspected People I should have treated as Vagrants (but with all possible Delicacy) they have not however been amongst us and for the future I beg you to advise me— There is not Frenchman—Emigrant or other but sighs to be again embosomed with his Country—Mr. Lachere83 was in this place last Novr. he declaimed upon the power of his nation and that in Case of a rupture with the U. S. they would insist on their ancient rights to possess to the Southern margin of our river—he reckons much upon French Interest in Kentuckey—all this has just come to my knowl- edge—a Captain D'Habercourt now going to France from Cincinnati and who may probably call upon you as a Frenchman in all its Lati- tude. Major Rivoli's Information may be correct but I think some attention would make your Canadian French American—You will have heard that the Sons of the Duke of Orleans have passed north- ward (not in the Territory) and conducted improperly with the Indians— I calculate upon your approbation of all my public Conduct Sir because I shall endeavour to Deserve it and you could not have afforded me higher Justification than the Assurance "I possess the president's Confidence"84 I will not forfeit it—so exalted is his 82 See Sargent to the Secretary of State, July 8, 1797, Journal Exec. Procs., post, ill, 471. 83 La Chaise, a French agent (Collins, Hist. Ky. I, 24). See St. Clair's proclama- tion, Dec. 8,1793, ante, p. 460. "June 30, 1797, ante, p. 611.
Page 620
620 TERRITORIAL PAPERS public and private Character in my View that to be well in his opinion is my high ambition— I am My Dear Sir with the most sincere wishes for the welfare of yourself & Family and with respectful Esteem your obedient humble Servant Your Letters to Detroit will generally find a ready Conveyance from Cincinnati—when necessary they will be despatched by Express—The Distance is 300 Miles and by the Communication of our Different forts their delivery may be made easy and expeditious. Secretary of State. PETITION TO CONGRESS BY INHABITANTS OF KNOX COUNTY [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:DS] [August 7, 1797] To the Honorable the President & Members of the Senate of the United States in Congress Assembled 86 — The Memorial of the Underwritten Subscribers—Humbly Sheweth That your Memorialists were invited & Strongly persuaded to Emi- grate to the County of Knox in the Territory of the United States N° West Of the Ohio River in the year Seventeen hundred & eighty four and untill the year Seventeen hundred & eighty Six by a Colo1 Legras one Of the Oldest ancient inhabitants & who Stiled himself Civil & military Commandant, and who assured Your Memorialists that they Should respectively hold, a reasonable Quantity of Land Which Should be allotted to them in the Vicinity of the Village of Vincennes— That your Memorialists in Consequence of Such assuances emi- grated to the Said Country & Soon after their arrival with leave of Colo1 Legras and by the approbation Of the Court had Each of them four hundred acres of Land Surveyed & returned to the Office, for which your Memorialists in General paid the Customary fees— That altho' frequent applications were made to the said Comman- dant your Memorialists hath never Obtained any deed for the Said Land allotted to Each of them, which your Memorialists attributed to the negligence of the Clerk and the dishonesty Of the Surveyor to Whom in some Instances the fees Of the Office had been Paid, and Who ultimately absconded— That your Memorialists however Cleared & Cultivated Part of the Several Tracts allotted them & Continued to Enlarge their respective improvements Until Seventeen hundred and Eighty Six when they were forced to desist and retire to the Village86 — "See petition, Dec. 27,1797, post, p. 634. "See act of Mar. 3,1791, ante, p. 339.
Page 621
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 621 That your Memorialists remained in the Village about Two Years, and notwithstanding they rented Lands from the ancient settlers during that time, they became So indigent, that necessity constrained them to establish Stations, Which were frequently broken up by the Indians— That in the different attacks made by the Indians on these Settle- ments in Stations, Several Were killed & wounded, among whom Were the Husbands Of the Several Widows, Whose Names are here- unto Subscribed—Under all these circumstances your Memorialists have never relinquished their Claim to their respective Improve- ments, & to which they returned as soon after the Peace made with the Indians of the Wabash at Vincennes in 1792, as circumstances permit- ted, and Which they have Since Continued to improve in Peace That your memorialists are & were heads of families, and have always been Good and faithful Citizens Of the United States; That if they should be dispossessed of their Present Improvements, they and their families Must be reduced to Indigency & Want.— Your memorialists therefore humbly Pray; that Congress Will take their Peculiar Case into Consideration, and be pleased to Grant to each of them four hundred acres of Land to Make them equal with their fellow Citizens Who have Obtained such Grants from the Court—And to the Widows and heirs such quantity as May Seem reasonable Which will compensate in some degree their Sufferings, and Cover their respective Improvements 87 And Your Memorialists Will ever Pray &c Vincennes August 7th 1797 John Martin Moses Decker Rachel Pea widow Heirs of John Glass Sebastian Fredric Louis Fredrick Mary Fredric Widow Joseph Decker Tobias Decker Ralph Matson Mary Noy Widow Ann Willson widow Mary Pancake Widow [Endorsed] Legis: 5. Cong: 2. Sess: Petition of John Martin & others Inhabitants of Vincennes. August 7th 1797.88 87 See report of St. Clair to the Senate, Jan. 7, 1799, post, III, 3. 88 A similar petition, signed by the same persons, is addressed to the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives with the endorsement: "Legis: 5. Cong: 2. Sess: Petition of John Martin and others Inhabitants of Vincennes. March 5th 1798." Elizth Hinton Widow Heirs of Widow Levens Allen Ramsey Robert Johnston Geo" Leech Philip Cott John Robins John Westfall Eliz H[a]rbin widow Jacob Teverbough Heirs of James Holliday Thomas Silby
Page 622
622 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OHS: Sargent Papers :C] private Cincinnati the llth of August 1797 Dear Sir From Marietta Washington County I acknowledged the receipt (at that place) of several private as well as public Letters which you did me the honour to write me 89—explained to you the Causes which had drawn me to that part of the Territory and thereby I trust have satisfactorily accounted why I am not at this Moment upon the Eastern banks of the Mississippi as it must fully appear I knew not the president's pleasure and was destitute of the means of proceeding 90 —I wait here only for a small Escorte which I expect from Gen1 Wilkinson to whom I addressed a Line thereupon so soon as your Letters came to hand 91— I have very often my Dear Sir taken Leave to press upon you the absolute necessity there is for the Judges to be more within the Terri- tory and in my last Letter urged an Appointment to the vacancy made by Judge Turner—I presumed not to mention any Name & indeed I know not a suitable Character but I must add however to what I have already said upon this Subject that we should have a man more National than territorial or at least quite as much so— amongst us there is not I believe a suitable person—A Mr McMillan formerly one of the Judges of the pleas in Hamilton County and now a practicing Attorney here of much popular Talent perhaps may be mentioned to you but it appears to me that neither his principles or his Abilities suit him by any means for the office—he will be very forward amongst those who shall first and soon advance to make of this a new State—I believe (for myself) that the period for such importance to us should be kept distant—at least that it should be delay'd till we acquire another Town than can be derived from such men as are generally first Settlers, or frontier people & until the majority of the Inhabitants be of such Characters & property as may insure national Dependance & national Confidence—at present, I have already told you Sir, but the matter may be of moment enough to repeat it, that I have not abundance of Faith in the national Attach- ment of the people from the Indian Line quite up to the new England Settlements upon Ohio Company Lands—many of them, are not the very best of a neighbouring State of Doubtful polities—their Inde- pendence (and greater Consequence may be accelerated or retarded by the general Government as they shall think proper for if I remember right it is provided that the States hereafter to be formed may not 89 Aug. 5, 1797, ante, p. 618. * See the Secretary of State to Sargent, June 30, 1797, ante, p. 611. Not found.
Page 623
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 623 exceed one hundred Square Miles of Course there may be two Lines of more than 100 Miles (North and South) From the Line of Fort recovery to the Kentuckey and Pennsylvania bounded upon the North by the Line of recovery & Fort Lawrance & by including the Country to Lake Erie there may be four distinct Governments—excepting therefrom the Territory west & north of the principal Indian Lines— and of this Exception I have presumed to give to you an Opinion heretofore that it s"hould Constitute a separate Governt. You will pardon me my Dear Sir if I express myself too freely I have the public weal at heart and am really national. I consider myself writing a private Letter though it is but proper that every Species of Information of public moment may be communicated to the President—and if the Business of the Territory should come before Congress in their next Session I would request that all my private communications in which the Interests of the same or the Nation are involved may be freely imparted in Confidence to my Friend Mr Ross of the Senate in whose Abilities and respect for the sovereignty and honour of the United States I have the most implicit Faith—I had proposed to write him much and freely but my Tour to the west will prevent—indeed Sir this Government has actually become too unwieldy for all the attention of any one even the greatest man— The enclosed papers No 1 & 2M will evince to you I think Sir that I should instantly divide myself between Wayne County and those to the West; but, that Judge Gilman is now upon his way to Detroit I should apprehend much from the representation here enclosed— previous Letters from me Sir which you must have received will have prepared you to Expect to hear of uneasiness in that Quarter— I mentioned to you long since the Opinion of A St Clair Junr an Attorney Gen1 upon the Exemptions and privileges of british Subjects by Treaty,83 and the consequent Mischiefs I dreaded—Mr St Clair I am persuaded is a well meaning young Man, but I feel Confident that the Interests of the United States would be promoted if Congress should appoint (with a Salary) some most respectable Law Character to that office within the Territory— My responses to No 1 & 2 are enclosed—I have proposed to make them private because I can not but hope that the fears of the Magis- trates are in some measure upon false Grounds, and I have specially written to Judge Gilman at Detroit to substantiate for me every thing I ought to know as properly preliminary to that kind of Decision which may become my Duty— Should it be found too true Sir that the Civil Authority is inade- quate to Government you would supremely oblige me by your Coun- 82 Not found. n Not found. See Audrain to Sargent, June 28,1797, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 624
624 TERRITORIAL PAPERS sels for in it I have the highest Confidence—I may find it necessary to proceed immediately from the Mississippi to Detroit—an early Letter therefore and which under any Circumstances (if you desired it) should be Considered as private might be highly advantageous to me and Government— From Detroit Sir I informed you that the records in which I be- lieved our people were principally and almost alone interested had been carried to the british Side of the Line and demanded under my order by the recorder of Wayne County—to which has been made the reply No 3 A new Town is laid off by the British opposite Detroit and when I tell you that the Americans have christened it Smugglingburg you will possess our Idea of the Intention— I can not inform you precisely of the number dubbing themselves british Subjects in Wayne County—they however are considerable and I am assured from good Authority that "great pains were taken by some of the principal people british subjects" to get Signatures from poor ignorant simple people & who made their marks through fear & threats without knowing what they did"—these are the words of my respectable Correspondent who tells me that in a short Time he expects to make me a special Statement of the business— I am with Sentiments of most respectful Esteem your obedient humble servant W Sargent [Endorsed] Copy of a Letter to the Secretary of State 14th August 1797 [*] RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta September 2? 1797 SiR I herewith forward the accounts of the Surveyor Gene" department closed to the 30th of June last;94 with Wm R Putnams95 bill of survey as a voucher, if this mode of Charging the servis of the Dep- uty Surveyors does not meet your approbation you will please to point out the defect, that in future the accounts may be rendered conformable to your wishes— * I have drawn upon agreeably to your Authority for 1000 Dollars at 5 Days Sight—I know not what will be essentially necessary for there can be no calcu- lating when I may return but every Sixpence not expended in this Jaunt shall be transmitted to you [Footnote on the MS. No corresponding asterisk appears in the body of the letter.] M In accordance with the instructions of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 591. M Eldest son of Rufus Putnam.
Page 625
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 625 As No expenses incident to the department have arisen previous to the First of April, except my Sallery, I apprehended it was unneces- sary to make out seperate accounts for each previous Quarter.— There has been other surveys to a considerable amount, besides that of the Moravian Land, executed in the month of June but as the accounts have Not ben rendered to me there omission is unavoidable; they must therefore be charged in a subsequent account, And indeed such is the nature of the service incident to the department that it probably will always be the case that the surveys executed in one quarter of the year must in part and perhaps sometimes in whole be charged in the account of a susequent quarter— Plans of the Lands surveyed by Mr Putnam were forwarded the 22d of July96 in the Mail, secured in a Paistboard cover I should be glad to know if these plans have ben recived or not. Capt Ludlow has compleated the survey of the Indian boundary Line between the Tuscarawas Crossing above Fort Lawrence97 and the place pointed out by the treaty neer Lorimies Store:—When by vari- ous courses Capt Ludlow had arived at the Crossing place above Fort Lawrence he found by calculation the course of the true line back must be S 78°—50' W on that course Sais he "I continued the Line, cut the brush and marked it in a conspicuous maner, but was not for- tunate enough to strike the place of begining: I struck Lorimies Creek Twenty three Chains 50 links above the place intended or fork of Said Creek, which error I was very sorry to find; as the Indians are an Ignorant and jealous people & it is very improper to give them the lest cause to suspect that any advantage would be taken of them; on that account I would have wished the error was on the other hand I wish with Mr Ludlow that he had fallen to the south rather than on the North for the reasons he mentions, but I think he was very fortu- nate in his return to come out so near the place of departure in runing a line 153 mile in length; especially sence iii Runing Eastward he fell so far south of his object It would have ben a more happy circumstance if Mr Ludlow in his return had exactly hit the spot or fallen to the south of it: however I do not apprehend the Indians will complain of this small deviation: but it seems Mr Isaac Zane98 who is a Brother of Col° •« Ante, p. 614. 87 See Peters, Ohio Lands, pp. 113-114. •8 Among the private grants donated by Congress was one to Isaac Zane, in 1802, at the site of the present village of Zanesfield, Logan County, Ohio. The original bill, inspired by a memorial from Zane, presented to the Senate, Dec. 31, 1801, and to the House of Representatives, Jan. 7, 1802, embodied a proposal for a grant of six sections; in the bill as finally enacted only three sections were granted (House of Representatives Journal, 7 Cong., 1 sess., pp. 34, 45, 50, 61, 85, 135, 163; Senate Journal, 7 Cong., 1 sess., pp. 36, 154, 157, 160). The act, approved Apr. 3, 1802, is in 6 Stat. 46. 126650—34 41
Page 626
626 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Zane of Wheeling and who has lived with the Indians from his youth, has ben long sence adopted by the Wyandots and is considered as a Chief by that Nation, has mistaken the boundaries as fixed by Gen- eral Wayns Treaty of which error Capt Ludlow has not ben able to convince him; his (Zanes) Claim would cut of from the United States about 500,000 acres of the best land in that part of the Country, For an explanation of this business I have enclosed an extract of Capt Ludlows Letter to me and a Copy of a Letter sent by Capt Ludlow to Isaac Williams another White Chief of the Wyandot Nation.— that the Line is run agreebly to the treaty there can be no doubt, except the small error in Capt Ludlows return to the place of his de- parture, but should Williams take up the same conceit that Zane has they may make much uneasiness among the Indians— I have the honor to be with Great Respect Sir your obedient Servent Rufus Putnam S G The H0NBe Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasury [Endorsed] N° 11 Marietta September 2d 1797 Rufus Putnam— Surveyor G1 inclosing letters from Capt Ludlow Recorded in Surveyor Generals Book page 23 d acct8 to be transmitted for settlement OW ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [OHS: Sargent Papers :C] Rapids of the Ohio 8th of Sept 1797 Sir I was delay'd at Cincinnati after my Return from laying off the two Counties up the river in Expectation of receiving a small Escorte from General Wilkinson but his unexpected Tour to Michili- makinac depriving me of all hope of hearing from him in Season, upon the 4th Inst: I left Cincinnati— The enclosed were this morning received, and I trust the contents may establish with you the opinion I have very long entertained by a small Garrison of regular Troops being absolutely necessary upon the Mississippi—I proceed there this Day, my whole Force three hunters— but the Adventure seems to me absolutely necessary though I believe without the Countenance of some military Aid I may be but an effi- cient "Forlorn" for the Interests of Government— Mr Edgar the writer of one of the Letters is hl Col. Commandant of the Militia of Randolph County99— with great respect your obedient humble servant W Sargent Honhle Secretary of State - See Edgar to St. Clair, Aug. 25, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS).
Page 627
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 627 GENERAL JAMES WILKINSON TO JOHN EDGAR AND WILLIAM ST. CLAIR [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:ALS] Head Quarters Detroit Sept. 14th 1797 Gentlemen I have seen extracts from your Letters to Captain Pasteur, under date of the 30th June,1 and am sensibly impressed by the same— The defection of our Citizens in your settlements I have long appre- hended and duly represented to the Minister of War, and I would have made a post there before this had I received orders— In the present state of things it becomes my duty to exercise my discretion, and I am now engaged in preparations to transfer part of my force from this quarter to yours, to support the Government and its officers there, and to suppress every unlawful proceeding— I shall command this Detachment in person, and shall have the means at Massac for arming and equiping the virtuous Citizens— My movements will depend upon the State of the Waters of the Wabash, and of consequence they will be precarious; I cannot there- fore say with the precision I wish, at what time I shall reach Massac— I will however send you a courier as I pass Fort Knox, and for fear of accidents, I will now express my wish that one of you may be at Massac on or before the 20th October, with ten or a dozen good Boat- men, who have been accustomed to ply between the Mouth of the Ohio and Kaskias. For many reasons I must enjoin it on you to hold this communica- tion in strict reserve from all persons—for in these times it is difficult to tell who are our foes, or to know when or where we may have to fight—. With consideration and esteem, I am Gentlemen Your most Obedt Servt— Ja: Wilkinson Mess" Edgar & St. Clair. [Addressed] Mess" Edgar & Sl Clair Commanding Officers of Militia Vale of Kaskaskias. [Endorsed] Wilkinson Sept14th 1798 1 Not found. See Edgar to St. Clair, Aug. 25, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS); Wilkinson to Sargent, Sept. 6 and 15, 1797, loe. ext.
Page 628
628 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816 :C] Treasury Department September 16"11797 Rufus Putnam Esquire Surveyor General Sir, I have received your Letters of the 1"2 & 2nd instant3—the account rendered appears to be right, from a cursory examination except that there is not a receipt to Mr Wm Rufus Putnams account for surveying the Moravian Townships, this defect you will supply— If any error is discovered it will be pointed out to you by the Comp- troller, whose duty it is finally to settle your accounts. It is very important that the Indians should be well satisfied with the manner in which the line is run—to prevent future uneasiness, the small deviation ought to be pointed out to some of the Cheifs.— if there appears to be the least discontent, I submit it to your con- sideration, whether a new line ought not to be run westward from the fork of Loramies Creek and the Miami, until it arrives so near the line marked by Mr Ludlow as to be easily connected with it. This may be done perhaps, when the lines of Townships are run without much trouble or expence. You will however judge whether this is necessary after bearing in mind that a considerable body of Land ought not to be considered as any equivalent for the mischief which would ensue from loosing any portion of the confidence of the Indians. I am disappointed in finding that a sufficient Escort was not appointed to attend Mr Ludlow for the purpose of marking the line in a durable and proper manner, nor can I account for the uncertainty expressed by Mr Ludlow, whether the Indians were duly notified— As General Wilkinson must necessarily have some agency in whatever concerns the intercourse with the Indians, and as this circumstance will render the responsibility for what is done more complex, than would be the case if one Officer only was concerned I would recommend to you the utmost punctuality in your correspondence with the General, and that you would endeavour to have every arrangement well concerted and mutually understood.—Of any difficulty which may arise, you will be pleased to keep me well advised.4 The draft in favor of Mr Dayton will be transmitted to him immediately.6— I am &c &c Oliver Wolcott. Exa 2 GLO, Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64. The letter is a simple acknowledgment. , Ante, p. 624. 4 Cf. the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 592. • Answered Oct. 7, 1797, post, p. 681.
Page 629
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 629 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [SD:Dom. Letters, X:C] Trenton. Sepr 18th 1797. His Excellency Arthur Sl Clair Esqr, Sir. I recd on the 14th your letter 11th inst.8 I do not know of any special bussiness requiring your presence in the Northwestern Terri- tory this Fall; and the Circumstances you mention and particularly the necessity of your attending the sales of the public lands at Pitts- burg, which would require your immediate return thither, were you to go down the river, may well excuse your forbearing to encounter, in your infirm state, the fatigues of the Journey. I am not in a situation to examine the question, Whether in the absence of the. Governor, who is the superintendant of Indian affairs, the Secretary of the Territory can intermeddle in Indian affairs, as well as execute, conformably to the act of Congress of the 7th of August 1789,7 all the powers of the Governor. I have not with me the ordinance under which the superintendant is appointed.8 It is clear however, as you observe, that the Secretary's power is limited to the territory and the superintendant's embraces the whole northern Department. Nevertheless, occasions may occur in which the inter- ests of the U. States may require an intercourse with the Indians residing in the Northwestern Territory, thro' a public agent, when the superintendant is absent, and in a situation not to attend within the requisite time & in such case, the Secretary would doubtless be excused for acting as his representative. The titles of the inhabitants of Detroit to lands in that District seem to me to demand the attention of Congress: I will lay the matter before the President prior to the next Sessions.9 The provision of seals for the counties I will mention to my Chief Clerk, as soon as he joins me here, ascertain what has been done, & direct the execution of what is deficient I am very respectfully &c Timothy Pickering • Extract, Smith (ed.), St. Clair Papers, n, 421-422. 7 Ante, p. 203. 8 Aug. 7, 1786 (ordinance for the regulation of Indian affairs), ante, p. 19. • See Sargent to the Secretary of State, Sept. 30, 1796, Journal Exec. Procs., post, in, 458. The question of the validity of civil government in Wayne County delayed the settlement of this issue.
Page 630
630 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT TO SENATOR ROSS [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:ALS] KASKASKIAS 2d October 1797— Dear Sir I have one moment only to tell you that I have been informed a Petition is to be brought forward to Congress in Favour of persons making Settlements and having Claims of later Date in this and the Wabash Country10 than has been contemplated in the Laws already passed, which I believe to be sufficiently liberal and that further Instructions might by interfering with Confirmations and Distributions already legally made, produce much Confusion and Disquietude in the Country—All that appears necessary more for Government to do in the Land business here is to direct the Gov- ernor to make Deeds * for the four hundred Acre Donations when the same shall have been surveyed and to permit him to sell small intermediate Tracts between Donations and Confirmations of the old Claims; the right to which may be in the United States and which might promote regular Settlement, and otherwise probably may hereafter get into the hands of Intruders and create Trouble and Expense to Government— It is necessary also perhaps to have perfectly understood the Boundaries of the Lands about Vincennes and the Villages of the Mississippi as they relate to the Indians as otherwise the surveying of the old Grants made under French and British Governments— and the Donation Tracts may produce some Uneasiness with the Indians—Some people here have been leasing Lands From Indians— an association (not inconsiderable) has been entered into in Favour of France and so feeble was the power of the Magistrates that no Notice thereof could be taken—I have however for Eight or ten Days been exerting myself—I can not probe the French Business but have caused several persons appearing to me criminal in both affairs to recognise therein to appear before the general Court of the Terri- tory:—for the Sake of the Country my Dear Sir exert yourself that we may have Judges and that they shall discharge their Duties— we have too many Bad men in this Extreme—at present they seem a little intimidated but I can not say how long it will continue—I expect however that I have prevailed upon Gen1 Wilkinson to estab- lish a Garrison upon the Mississippi which will strengthen the Arm of the Magistrates most of whom, though very uninformed are really good men—I expect a Detachment of regular Troops in two weeks— 10 Feb. 20, 1797, from Kaskaskia, ante, p. 590. * those donations were ordered to be laid off where it has been found the Lands had been granted away; since, I have been told, a Bill has passed the house of representatives making provision—but not yet with the Senate—[Footnote on the MS.]
Page 631
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 631 This unconnected discourse I must send off without Copying; I am alone without Aid and indeed not a little indisposed—all the Country, American & Spanish Side are sick and the Mortality is great—Gayoso is now Governour of Lousania—he descended 'tis said to Orleans upon the 21" of August from the Natchez, as also that the Artillery is taken from that Post—at Sl. Louis, Col Howard being gone Zeno [l0*] commands, about forty Soldiers 300 Militia and upwards of twenty pieces of Cannon Sixes & threes they are still continuing to strengthen their ranks:—from the Missouri to the mouth of the Ohio are perhaps in Total about 900 militia and 300 Indians—though it is declared by some, they they can never muster together 500 Militia— with most respectful Esteem yours—. W Sargent— Remark—A proviso in the Law of 179111 relating to the Lands of the people of this Country causes a forfeiture of their rights & Claims that should not be made or presented in a given Time—is this Consti- tutional? &c 112— [Endorsed] Legis: 5. Cong: 2. Sess. Letters from W. Sergeant relative to lands in the north western territory. October 2d 1797.13 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta October 7th 1797 Sir Your favor of the 16th Ultimo 14 has been received the contents of which I shall pay perticuler attention to, Septtember 25th I drew an ordor on the Treasurer of the United States for 640 Dollars, the 2d instend I drew another ordor on him for 174 Dollars both in favor of William Skiner. And this Day I drew an ordor on the Treasurer for 813 Dollars 56 Cents in favor of Dudley Woodbridge— I herewith enclose my account of the quarter Commenceing the First day of July and ending the 30th of September inclusive with Capt Ludlows account against me as a voucher, It is not in my power at present to have Capt Ludlows account Receipted, on account of his being in the woods surveying the Military Lands you must be sensible however that I am greatly in advance to him by my order on the Treasurer in his favor payable to Mr Dayton—And with respect to the other surveyors I have advanced very considerable sums to them and have their receipt to account, and at the close of the present ,0* Zenon Trudeau. "Act of Mar. 3, 1791, ante, p. 340. 12 See St. Clair's report to the Senate, Jan. 7, 1799, post, ill, 3. 13 Answered Dec. 22, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS). "Ante, p. 628.
Page 632
632 TERRITORIAL PAPERS season of surveying when they return from the woods there accounts will be made out and the Necessary vouchers of my payments ob- tained and forwarded to the Treasury department, Indeed to close my accounts of payments with the Treasurer by producing to him the necessary Vouchers more then one in a year will be found impractica- ble because the surveyors from the opening of the spring untill neerly the setting in of Winter will be in the Woods, and to oblige them to make returns once a quarter would put it altogether out of their power to execute the surveys at the stipulated price for if they were to at- tempt to make these returns in the woods and forward them to me neerly half the time of all there hands would be lost, and besides it is impossible for them to Copy their minuts and make the plans in the woods with any degree of accuracy and neatness— I have the honor with great Respect to be Sir your obedient Servent Rufus Putnam S G Oliver Walcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasury [Endorsed] N° 13 Marietta October 7th 1797 Rufus Putnam—Sur- veyor General—Recorded in Surveyor Generals Book page 37. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [SD:Dom. Letters, x:C] Department of State Trenton Oct 16.1797. The Secretary of the Treasury Sir By the last mail I received from Winthrop Sargent Esqr. Secretary, and Acting Governor of the Northwestern Territory, advice of his draught on me for One Thousand Dollars.16 He had more than once represented the Extreme hardship of being obliged to perform all the duties of those two offices; and especially in making long journies, without any Compensation beyond his small salary as Secretary. The information received last summer, which was laid before the president, appeared to require Col° Sargent's going to the settlements on the Mississippi, but to which the expence was an Essential obstacle. The President directed an Allowance to be made. I wrote Col° Sargent accordingly: but not being able to cal- culate the expence, I left it to him to draw on me for the requisite sum.16 Hence this bill for $1000. which being evidently dispropor- tioned to that Single Service, doubtless was meant to embrace former like expenditures, particularly those occasioned by his Journey last year to Detroit, to organize a Government, after a surrender of the posts. I have no doubt the President will be willing to make a rea- 15 Not found. June 30, 1797, ante, p. 611.
Page 633
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 633 sonable allowance for the expence of those other services, on a fair statement of them. At any rate, the bill being drawn, I am desirous of paying it; leaving it to Col° Sargent hereafter to account for the application. I therefore pray you to give directions or authority to Mr Simpson, Cashier of the U States Bank, to pay the thousand Dollars to my order; the fund will be the Contingent Expences of Government I am very respectfully &c Timothy Pickering CHARLES BURRALL TO WILLIAM ST. CLAIR AND OTHERS [PO:Asst. P.M. Letter Bk. B] Genl Post Office Dept. Decernr 14. 1797 Mess" William St Clair and others Sirs Your memorial relative to the establishment of a Post Road from Louisville by Vincennes to Kaskaskias dated Feby 11th 1797.17 was received on the 5th of May. not being satisfied in what manner I could answer it together with the interruption of business occasioned by the late epidemic here, has delayed an answer until this time. I have now determined to send a Mail on the route once in two weeks, if it can be done on reasonable terms, & for that purpose I have this day written to Worden Pope esqr Post Master at Louisville Ky. and have desired him to procure a contract to be commenced immediately. I therefore hope that a communication with Kaskaskias will be soon opened, and have now to request that you will nominate a suitable person to hold the Office at Kaskaskias and have him execute the bond and take the oaths enclosed and return them to this Office when a commission will be duly forwarded, in the meantime to prevent delay he may commence the business of the Post Office A Copy of the Post Office Law with instructions, table and forms of accounts for the use of the Post Office are sent herewith.18 I am &c C. B. CHARLES BURRALL TO WORDEN POPE [PO:Asst. P.M. Letter Bk. B] Genl. Post Office Dept. December 15th 1797 Worden Pope Esqr Sir I wish to obtain a contract for carrying the Mail from Louis- ville by Vincennes to Kaskaskias once in two weeks until the first day of April 1798. from your former connection with the department » Not found. "See Burrall to Thacher, May 2, 1798, post, p. 646.
Page 634
634 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I take the liberty to request you to endeavour to make a Contract for that route. The distance I am informed is two hundred and sixty miles, being 100 from Louisville to Vincennes and 160 from Vincennes to Kaskas- kias The average price of carrying Mails once in two weeks, thro' the United States is at the rate of two dollars and a half a mile by the year counting the distance one way. at that rate a compensation for carrying the Mail from Louisville to Kaskaskias would be six hundred & fifty Dollars for a year, and I should suppose it might well be done for that sum, as the carier would not have many tavern bills to pay on the route, if however the contract cannot be obtained for that sum I wish you to contract on the best terms you can provided you do not exceed the rate of seven hundred & eighty dollars a year. I should not chuse to go higher than this last sum. I am informed that the road from Louisville to Vincennes, is tollerable tho not very good, but from Vincennes to Kaskaskias the path is very good, and the whole route may be performed in six days in summer and in seven days in winter. I enclose a blank contract and bond which if you find a proper person to contract I wish you to fill up and have properly executed and return them to this office when I will execute a counter- part of the contract and forward to you. If you should not be able to obtain a contract on the above terms I wish you to send an express with the enclosed papers for Vincennes & Kaskaskias, if a contract is made it will be sufficient to send them by the mail carrier, the expence of such an express will be paid to your order or remitted by post as you shall direct. Note. Your letter of the 14th October19 with your accounts was duly received. Agreeably to your recomendation I have this day for- warded an appointment for Mr John Eaton. I am &c C.B. PETITION TO CONGRESS FROM AMERICAN INHABITANTS OF VINCENNES [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:DS] [December 27, 1797] To the Precident Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress Assembled The Petition of the American Inhabitants Heads of Families at Vincenns in the County of Knox and Territory of the United States North West the river Ohio, who have Improved and Cultivated there Most Humbly Sheweth That your Petitioners wear Invited and Strongly prosueded to emigrate to this Country in 1784 and 1785 by Col: Legras one of the principal Antient Inhabitants who Stiled himself Civil and Millitary Commandant, assuring your Petitioners that they should respectively Not found.
Page 635
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 635 hold a reasonable quantity of land that Should be allotted them in the Vacinity of the Village of Vincenns— That your Petitioners in Consequence of these assurances emigrated to this place and soon after their arival made aplication to the Com- mandant & Court, who Directed your Petitioners to make Choice of Lands for themselves, where they Could find it Vacant, or Not Claimed by the Antient Setlers, and also directed the Surveyor to lay off for each of your Petitioners four hundred arpans, or Acres of land and Directed the Clark to Isue Concessions or Deeds for the Same That your Petitioners in Consequence of these directions, each of them Improved lands in the Vacinity of the Village, had each of them four hundred acres of land Surveyed and Returned to the office for which your Petitioners in general paid the customary Fees— That altho frequent aplications wear made to the Said Com- mandant Several of your Petitioners Never obtained any Concession or Deed for the Lands allotted each of them which your Petitioners attributed to the Negligence of the Clark and the Dishonesty of the Surveyor to whom in some Instance the Fees of the office had been paid, and who Ultimately absconded That Several of your Petitioners Cleered and Cultivated part of their Several Tracts, Untill 1786 but by the Hostility of the Indians wear not able to make any Conciderable Improvements or Cultivation on their respective Tracts, at which time they wear forced by the Indians to Desist and retire to the Village20 That your Petitioners remained in the Village about two years and Notwithstanding they rented lands of the Antient Setlers, during that time they became so Indigent that Necessity Constrained them to establish stations which wear frequently broke up by the Indians That Several of your Petitioners made Conciderable Improvements at the Stations which prevented them from Improveing on their Own Tracts, and which made extencive Improvements for the preporiators of these Stations That Several of your Petitioners made Conciderable Improvements and Cultivation on their Several Tracts in 1785. obtained Deeds or Concessions for the Same Are now granted Small Quantitys of Lands, by the Hon1 Winthrop Sarjants Secretary of This Territory That the Lands granted by the Antient Commandant and Court to Several of your Petitioners, wear taken into the Donation of Ten miles Square, granted by the Honarable Congress to the Antient Setlers, which has Constrained your Petitioners to Improve on other lands which they found Vacant, whereon they are now liveing That in the Different attacts made by the Indians on the Stations severals wear killed and wounded among whom wear the Husbands of the several Widow Petitioners, whose names are hereto subscribed, 20 See act of Mar. 3, 1791, ante, p. 340.
Page 636
636 TERRITORIAL PAPERS under all these Circumstances your Petitioners have Never relin- queshed their Claims to their respective Improvements, to which they returned as soon after the peace made with the Indians of the Wabash at Vincenns in 1792 as Circumstances permited, and and which they have since Continued to Improve in peace That in October 1797 the Hon1 Winthrop Sarjants Arived at this place. Acting As Govr and Commander in Chief of this Territory, your Petitioners laid their Claims before him, to some of your Peti- tioners he has granted No Lands, to others of your Petitioners he has granted Small Quantitys of Lands, the Quantitys he has been pleased to grant is annexed to the Names of the Persons to whome granted That your Petitioners are and wear Heads of families and has ever been good and faithfull Citizens of the United States, and Should they be Dispossessed of their respective Improvements they and their families will be reduced to Indigence and want Your Petitioners therefore most Humbly pray that Congress may take their Case into Concideration and be pleased to grant to Such of your Petitioners as are granted no lands. four Hundred Acres, and to such of your Petitioners as are granted small quantitys, a Quantity in addition thereto as may make your Petitioners equl. And to the Widows and Heirs Such Quantitys as may Seem reasonable which will Compensate in some degree their Sufferings and Cover their respective Improvements And Your Petitioners as in Duty bound shall ever Pray Vincennes December 27th 1797 [Endorsed] Legis: 2d Sess: 5'Cong: Petition of Ralph Matson, and others, praying confirmation of certain grants of land. February 20h 1798.21 granted Philip Cott Fred" Mehl Dinah Decker widow Louis Fredrick Rachal Pea widow Mary Fredrick widow Peter Fredrick Sabastian Frederick Chris" Hough John Robins John Martin John Westfall Moses Decker Robt Mayes Geo Leech Jacob Teverbough Tho" Silby 100 Heirs of James Holliday Ann Willson Widow Mary Noy Widow Mary Panncake Widow Elizh Hinton Widow John Wilmore Jam" Johnson Robert Johnston Abram Westfall Michael Thorn Junr 100 100 John Murphy Ralph matson Heirs of John Glass »1 See Annals, 5 Cong., 2 sess., 508, 516-517; report of St. Clair to the Senate, Jan. 7, 1799, post, in, 3.
Page 637
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 637 J. SAVARY TO SENATOR JOHN BROWN [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:ALS] [January 6, 1798] Sir Among the Objections which have been made to me in the commitee, two appear to me more weighty and as I fear to have not explained myself clearly enough verbally, I take the liberty to repeat again my answers as to the first point that to grant a new tract for the 8. new claim- ants, will be a dangerous precedent and lay the ground for some future claim. I have answered that it was less dangerous in this case than in any other, because the number of the real inhabitants in Gallipolis was perfectly known & ascertained at the time of the inscription of their name in 1795 to share in the grant & it was remembered & ob- served by all those presents, that the others who petition now were excluded by the reasons exposed in the petition and when they have requested me to Act for them I have asked them an exact note of all the claimants and it was a thing very easy at this time Since Novem- ber 1795. in such a confined settlement: Some other people certainly have bought from the Scioto company; but they have not inhabited in Gallipolis and are gone in Europe, or in the spanish Settlements and their rights as purchasers are preserved for their contracts With the Scioto company by the said act of grant by Congress in 1795 which had in view to relieve only the inhabitants of Gallipolis22 the second objection is, that Congress, or Executive having devised the mode of division among the inhabitants for the grant cannot be troubled again by those who have not appeared at the time fixed. That objection cannot concern the two ladies Laforge & Luc, who have constantly inhabited and who have been excluded from a participation in the grant, because their husbands, who only had right, were absent: it cannot concern [blank] who was inhabited at the time; but had not attained yet the full age of 18 years fixed by the act; as to all the five others some were ignorant of the grant some have been in the impos- sibility to come at the time and have exposed their reasons in the petition, which reasons are known by all the settlers of Gallipolis: it is more natural to think that at the moment of the act granting that tract in 1795. those who petition now, were in reality in full right of their share, being plainly & fully within the description con- templated by the act; and indeed it is to be wished that some other mode had been devised & to make some reservation for those Who 22 See "An Act to authorize a grant of lands to Stephen Monot, and others, inhabitants of Gallipolis, therein named", 6 Stat. 35-36. Its purpose was to extend the benefits of the act of Mar. 3,1795 (1 Stat. 442-443), to those who were prevented, by unavoidable absence, from obtaining their proportion of the land appropriated by that act for the relief of the inhabitants of Gallipolis. It was initiated by a petition to the Senate from Stephen Monot and others, April, 1797, ante, p. 598.
Page 638
638 TERRITORIAL PAPERS had a right to share in the grant & would not, in so remote a country, come at a single proclamation calling all those concerned who might be scatered in this extensive continent: perhaps some delay and some iterative advertisement could have been granted without great inconveniency; because the obligation to appears personally was, it seems, too rigourous and the exclusion too hard for those who had all the qualifications contemplated by the act; but might be delayed by some untoward events. As that Grant of 24000. acres was rather an act of Generosity or reward, than of Strict Justice it appears clearly that those who are really in the description of those that Congress had in view to relieve, cannot be deprived of that gratuity and separated now of the Com- panions of their dangers and misfortunes in the time of the indian war, on account of their not having fulfilled Strictly the terms of the law; Thus in granting their demand Congress will accomplish their true intention at the time of the first Grant in 1795. I have the honour to be respectfully Sir Your most obedt & humble servant j Savaby Philad1 6th Janry 1798. Jn Brown Esqr [Addressed] Honhle John Brown Senator of the United States.— Philadelphia _____ PETITION TO CONGRESS FROM INHABITANTS OF THE SCIOTO [SF:5 Cong., 2 sess.:DS] [February 1, 1798] To the Honorable The Senate and House oj Representatives of the United States in Congress Assembled23 The petition of the inhabitants of the Sioto River in the Territory of the united States North West of the Ohio River Humbly sheweth24— That your petitioners claimimg no landed property in the different parts of the united states from which they removed and being unable to purchase land at the enormous prices it sold for in those parts with the little money they had earned by their honest Industry being well convinced that their little All would be inadequate to purchase a Sufficient quantity at the present prices to enable them to rear their tender offsprings in a comfortable manner Under these circumstances and prompted by a desire natural to the human mind of Obtaining barely a competency in life they have left their friends and dearest connections have taken their lives as in their hands and faced danger and all the hardships attendant on the first setlers of an uncultivated frontier forest which many of your Honour- 2» Presented to the Senate, Feb. 1, 1798, by Senator Mason and referred, May 3, along with other papers relative to western lands to a select committee for report, which was submitted May 23 (Annals, 5 Cong., 2 sess., 495, 554). "See Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Oct. 30, 1798, post, p. 654.
Page 639
NORTHWE ST TERRITORY 639 able house no doubt have been well acquainted with and consequently will feel for those in similar circumstances—Your Honourable body passed a law on the 18th day of May 179626 providing for the sale of the lands of the United States North West of the Ohio River—by this law we find a reserve is made of a certain part of those lands another part is to be disposed of in tracts containing 5760 Acres and the remaining part in tracts of 640 Acres—We also find that one half of the purchase money is to be paid down and the other half if not punctu- ally paid within twelve months next after the time of the purchase being Made forfiets the first sum paid—On a consideration of this law we humbly conceive the smallest tracts too large for us to purchase and Risk the loss of half the purchase money and when we farther con- sider that one half the lands are to be disposed of in tracts containing 5760 we consider ourselves in a truly deplorable situation and should an indian War take place (which may God forbid) we leave your Honourable Body to Judge of our situation—Sixty miles from any settlement of consequence in the midst of an Indian Country and the most exposed part thereof—Disappointed in getting lands on easy and equitable terms in hopes of which we adventured our lives and the lives of our families.— The Virginia Military lands on the lower side of the Sioto are held Generally by persons who will neither sell or settle them—Those on the upper side of the Sioto are to be disposed of in such large tracts and on such Terms that we cannot become purchasers—Many of our nearest friends in a state of despondency have Accepted of the offers offers of the King of spain in his proclamation of the [blank in MS.] (current at present in the North Western territory) and have and are daily removing from their own country This is a fact too notorious to be denied Your petitioners therefore humbly hope and pray that your Honour- able Body will take this subject into your consideration and pass a law Authoriseing the Surveyor General to lay of a tract of land on the Sioto river Thirty miles Square Beginning Opposite to the Mouth of Paint creek thence up the river Sioto Thirty miles on a straight line Thence making a right angle with the General course of the river thirty miles thence parellel with the Gen1 Course of the river Thirty miles and thence to the Beginning and farther directing him to subdi- vide the same The one half into tracts of containing 160 acres and the other half into tracts of 640 acres Your petitioners further Humbly pray that the said Tracts of land may be sold to none but those who will become actual setlers thereon or have them setled in a limitted time which they may not exceed twelve months from the time of such purchase being made Your petitioners Humbly beg leave to suggest whether it would not tend to the more speedy settle- 25 Ante, p. 552.
Page 640
640 TERRITORIAL PAPERS ment of the lands and bringing the Value Thereof sooner into the publick Treasury was the price lowered or the present mode of sale Altered—Your petitioners humbly beg leave to mention that was your Honourable Body to grant this their petition (which they hope and trust you will) the interest of their common country would be promoted and that in case an indian war should take place they would be so strengthened as to be able to defend themselves and prevent the effusion of the Blood of their wives children and friends— And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever pray &c James Mennery John Graves James Kilgore Bazil Abrams Robt M'Mahan Sam1 Davis Jery McLane Abm Davison John McCoy Wm Kilgore Charles Jamison Adam Turner Hugh Menery James Brown Valentine Buchong Tho9 McCoy Robert Wilson William Jamison Joseph Quane John Wilson George Hoshor Tho8 Herrod Henry Stucker Daniel Hamilton Arthur Magill Thomas W1ly Terah Templin Robert Templin John Turner Thompson Smith Robert Stinson Thomas Righthouse George Kilgore John Winder Richard Nowlind William Murfin Gabriel Right Jobe Right Jonathan Craig Joseph Cory James Cory Joseph Jamison Thomas McDonald John Burns Nathan Cory Stephen Cory Robert Ralston James Dunlap George Heath Jonathan Wright Salmon Templin James Dickson Forga Moore Henry Hughston Sam1 G Flannigin James Johnston Sam1 McFarland James Mitchell Adam Croudson Adam Gilfillin Richd Menery Benj° Kerns George Suters William Simpson John Montgomery Ephraim Hobbs John Sharp William Lucas Lewis Graves Wm Craig Wm Davidson John Patton James Flanny Henry Sheely Tho8 Kilgore John Rippey James Rogers Joseph Lewis John Crawford David Shelby Jn° Rogers Jn° Kelly Hugh Cochran Charles Fallenash Dan1 Boltinghouse
Page 641
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 641 [Endorsed] Legis: 2d Sess: 5' Cong: Petition of Joseph Jamison and others of Scioto River, praying that the Surveyor General may lay out a tract of land thirty miles square for their purchase. February 1" 1798. May 3. referred to Commee 23. reportd with amendmt29 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [MHS: Pickering Papers :LPC] (private) Department of State Feby 2.1798 I have received your private letter of the 24th of Novr 27 on public business—containing the detail of your journey to the Mississipi28 to which, with your former communications, I will pay the earliest attention in my power.—I hope your health will soon be reestablished. —Gen1 Sl Clair, you will see, has been reappointed Govr of the N. W. Territory.29 I inclose a letter addressed to you in the handwriting of the late President General Washington;27 and am with great esteem & regard yr obl Servt Timothy Pickering Winthrop Sargent Esq THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO SURVEYOR GENERAL PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816 :C] Treasury Department February 12th 1798. Rufus Putnam Esquire Surveyor General of U. States Sir I am to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 2nd of December last,27 accompanied with the Platts of the three Tracts of Land which you caused to be surveyed for Ebenezer Zane. As it does not appear from any thing that has been received at this Office—that Mr Zane has complied with the provisions of the Law, (a copy whereof was transmitted to you in my letter of the 14th June 1796") I will thank you to inform him, that the Grant cannot issue until he shall produce satisfactory proof of his having substantially fulfilled the conditions annexed to the Grant.30 I am &c 0. W. 26 Annals, 5 Cong., 2 sess., 562. This report was the basis of the act of May 10, 1800, post, ill, 88. » Not found. 28 See Journal Exec. Procs., Sept. 15-Oct. 28, 1797, post, ill, 485 et seq. 29 Nominated Jan. 1 and confirmed Jan. 10, 1798 {Senate, Exec. Journal I, 257-258). M Acknowledged Mar. 9, 1798, post, p. 643. 126050—14 13
Page 642
642 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO JUDGE MEIGS [MHS: Pickering Papers:LPC] Department of State, 28th Feby 1798. Sir The President of the United States, desiring to avail the public of your services, as one of the Judges in and over the territory of the United States, North West of the River Ohio,34I have now the honor of enclosing the commission and of expressing the sentiments of respect, with which I am, Sir, Your most obed. servt Timothy Pickering Return Jonathan Meigs junr Marietta N. W. Territory. THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO ACTING GOVERNOR SARGENT [SD:Dom. Letters, x:C] Department of State March 9.1798. Winthrop Sargent Esqr Secretary of N. W. Territory. Sir, This morning I received your letter of the 8th of January.35 You have justly discredited the news of an intended invasion of the Illinois, as transmitted to you from Kaskaskias. There are probably about 200 or 250 men at Nogales—Col° Howard36 when he descended from fort Louis carrying with him only about 100, as a letter from Capt. Guion37 now recd informs us; and the Garrison at the Natchez consists of about 50 men. Further, you will see by the newspapers, that our intelligence from New Orleans, dated in Decr & Jany, advises that Govr Gayoso has received orders from Spain to deliver up the forts in the Natchez district, and to run the boundary line. I believe it is to be depended on. The Spanish Consul at New York has made no secret of it: He communicated it to his brother Stoughton, the Spanish Consul at Boston, who freely communicated it, and told a friend of mine there that he had a copy of the order in Spanish. Further still, I am satisfactorily informed, that the Chevalier d'Yrujo has received the like advices from Govr Gayoso, altho' he !4 Nominated Feb. 9 and confirmed Feb. 12, 1798 {Senate, Exec. Journal, l, 261). M Journal Exec. Procs. post, ill, 496. Don Carlos Howard, an Irish officer in the Spanish service; appointed mili- tary commandant of upper Louisiana in 1796 (Houck, ed., Spanish Regime in Mo., II, 122). See also Vanderburgh to Sargent, May 20, 1797, Sargent Papers (MHS). 37 Isaac Guion of New York, appointed captain U. S. Infantry, 1792 (Heitman, comp., Hist. Reg. U. S. Army, I, 483).
Page 643
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 643 has not communicated it to our Government—deeming it improper to do it, seeing it was not transmitted to him directly from his Court. Last week I received your report of the executive proceedings in the N.W. Territory.38 We have at last received letters from our Envoys at Paris. On the 4th instant arrived the first letter from them since they left Holland; it is dated the 8th of January, was laid before Congress, and will be found in the Newspapers. They had not been and did not expect to be received, or in any manner to accomplish the object of their mis- sion. Nothing short of abject submission to arbitrary and unwarrant- able demands will satisfy the present imperious rulers of France It will ultimately appear that our Envoys have as was to be expected from their characters, conducted themselves with ability, dignity & firmness—while they manifested the most forbearing patience. Their other letters prior to that of the 8th of January are very interesting—I suppose they will not for some time be made public. I am respectfully &c Timothy Pickering RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div.E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta, March ye 9th 1798 Sir I have lately receiv'd a letter from Capt Ludlow informing me that he had completed, the survey of the Western District of Military lands, and that his returns will be ready in a short time39— Martin & Biggs have disappointed me exceedingly they both com- menced their surveys, last June, and by contract, were to complete them within four Months which they might easily have done, if no misfortune or negligence had taken place, their Districts were seperate althoe their Contract was joint—Martin is more than two thirds in arear, and Biggs nearly one half Capt Biggs's excuse is, that he was taken sick the 2nd of August, and obliged to retire from the woods—arid was not able to reassume his work, untill the 23rd day of October, and obliged to quit again, the 22nd of November on account of the severity of the weather; he assures me that he will be out again this Spring as soon as the season will permit— Capt Martin I have not yet seen, but learn that he left the woods sometime in July or August and has not been out since, of which circumstance I had no notice 'till within these few weeks, his excuse is sickness in his Family; but I find this must have been late in the 58 July 1-Dec. 31,1797, Journal Exec. Procs., post, III, 471 et seq. "Cf. report of the Secretary of the Treasury to the Senate, Feb. 2,1798, A.S.P., Pub. Lands, I, 81-82.
Page 644
644 TERRITORIAL PAPERS fall, and I apprehend, after the time had elaps'd in which, by Con- tract he ought to have completed his work in the field; Capt Martin has formerly executed some surveys for the United States with accuracy and punctuality which induced me to give him a District, in preference to some others, but at present I am quite disatisfied with his conduct, and if he does not exert himself to complete the survey of his District early this spring, I shall employ some other means to effect it— With respect to the other public land my intention is to survey in the course of the present year, All the land lying south of the Military tract, and west of the Ohio Companies purchase and the seven Ranges; extending westward as far as the Sioto River, estimated at about 3,150,000 acres the survey of this tract will employ six surveyors—and arrangements are making accordingly— I also propose to survey in the course of the present year that tract of land lying below the Great Miami River, and above the mouth of Kentuckey river extending West toward the Indian boundary as far as shall be judged prudent without giving cause of Alarm at the same time by running out one or two Ranges of Townships on the west side of the great Miami extending as far North as fort Recovery, and the fork of Loramies Creek I shall be able to assertain the true course of the Indian boundary without the expence of running a random line, as we were obliged to do at the Northward—as soon as this is done General Wilkinson will be notified of the time and place when & where we shall be ready to commence running the Indian boundary line from the fork of Loramies Creek to fort Recovery and thence to the Ohio agreeably to Gen1 Wayn's treaty—As soon as the Indian boundary lines are completed—it is intended to complete as soon as may be the survey of the whole tract of land west of the Great Miami included within those boundary lines40— I have the Honor to be with due respect Sir your obedient Servt Rufus Putnam The Honb" Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury P S your letter of the 12th ult was duly recived41— [Endorsed] N° 16 Marietta March 9th 1798 Rufus Putnam—Sur- veyor General of U. States relative to Surveys of lands Recorded in S. G. page 35. The S. G. to be desired to fix a time when it can be depended on that the Military Lands will be surveyed. 0 W « Cf. the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 592. 41 Ante, p. 641.
Page 645
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 645 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816 :C] Treasury Department March 31" 1798 Rufus Putnam Esqr Surveyor General of the United States Sir, Your letter of the 9th instant has been duly received.— It is matter of real regret that some of the persons employed to survey the military Lands should have failed in their engagements— more especially as the parties interested in the business are very anxious to obtain their rights. I have therefore to request, that you will without delay employ such persons as can be confided in to com- plete the remainder of the survey and that you will fix a time when I may expect to receive the Platts at this Office. I am &c & 0. W. Eif1 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta 21" of April 1798 Sir Your letter of the 31" Ult°—has been duly receiv'd; since my letter to you of the 9,h of March, I have receiv'd the most possitive assurance from Martin & Biggs, that they would complete their Districts, as early this Spring as possible; and knowing it to be in their power to complete the work sooner than any other persons I could employ; I consented they should prosecute the business, and I am informed they are already gone into the woods for the purpose— I shall endeavour to be informed of their perseverance & progress, and if I discover any delay or neglect, shall procure some other persons to be employ'd— You desire me to fix a time when you may expect to receive the plats at the Office of the Treasury Department—this Sir is impossible to be done within several weeks at least, and perhaps Months—I find that copying the field notes, making and recording in a neat an accu- rate manner a plat of each Township; with a fair Copy for the Secre- tary of the Treasury, consumes much more time than I expected it would have done—Capt Ludlow writes me (y" 2nd of March)42 that "Mr Schank and himself have been for the space of two months, busily employ'd in making out their returns of survey, but we are n[ow] (he says) within ten days of completing them"; this was the Western District, which they had been about three months in survey- ing—from his account, and the time it has taken to record the minutes, plats &c of the two Districts survey'd by Mathews & Jackson I have not the least expectation, that a plat of each township with a general « Not found.
Page 646
646 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Map of the whole Military tract will be ready to be delivered at your Office before the middle of November— Capt Ludlow has not yet arrived with his returns but from a letter of his of a recent date, he must be now on his way up the river— The 18th of January last I forwarded my account for the last quarter of the year 1797 "0—in which I charged for hire of a Clerk &c a letter was enclosed with this account, stating some reasons, which I con- ceiv'd gave me a right to expect that Government had or would provide for the expence of a Clerk in my Office; to this letter I have receiv'd no answer, I should be glad to know if it has been receiv'd and what I am to expect in regard to the business of Clerkship— I am with due consideration sir your Obedient servent Rufus Putnam Honb" Oliver Wolcott Secretary of the Treasury [Endorsed] N° 17 Marietta April 218t 1798 Rufus Putnam Survr Gen1 Answd June 1" 17984 8 relative to Surveys of Lands Recorded in S G" Book page 38 Answer No express provison for a Clerk has been made by law, but that in my opinion the employment of one is indispensibly necessary48 OW CHARLES BURRALL50 TO GEORGE THACHER61 [PO:Asst. P.M. Letter Bk. C] Genl Post Office Dept May 2nd 1798. Honhle George Thacher Sir I have received two petitions relative to the establishment of a Post Road from Louisville in Kentucky by Vincennes to Kaskaskias in the North Western Territory, and from Kaskaskias to Cahokia; the petition contains personal engagements, on which the Post master General has grounded some steps which he has taken towards the object of the petition. I have therefore enclosed you copies of the petitions;62 the expediency of establishing a post road from Louisville by Vincennes to Kaskaskias will appear so fully from the petitions and the maps of that country that I have no doubt the committee will recommend it, if it shall appear proper to make any new post Roads this session.63 I am &c C. B. "Buell (ed.), Memoirs Putnam, pp. 420-423. 48Ibid., pp. 425-426. «• See the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 593. M First Assistant Postmaster General. 61 Representative in Congress from Massachusetts, 1789-1801. 52 Not found. ■ See Burrall to William St. Clair, Dec. 14, 1797, and to Pope, Dec. 15, 1797, ante, p. 633; the Postmaster General to Morrison, Mar. 21, 1799, post, in, 19, and to Jones, Nov. 28, 1799, post, in, 70.
Page 647
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 647 RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta May 31" 1798 Sir—I herewith enclose my quarterly account, closed to the thirty first of March Last: with Major Ludlows and Capt Biggs bills of Survey; a bill for Clerk hire & receipts of payment charged there in: also Major Ludlows receipt for payment of his bill for Surveying the Indian boundary Line, charged in my account ending the last of September last.— haveing made Large advances to Major Ludlow I felt my Self under a degree of necessity to delay this return untill I could obtain his bill & receipts (which was don but yesterday) otherwise the draughts which I have made of Late & expect to make, soon, in ordor to execute the Surveys contemplated the ensuing Season might appear extravagant54— The following are the ordors I have drawn on the Treasurer sence writeing you on that Subject, viz Doll May—14th in favor of Charles Greene one ordor 311,70 19th d° d° d° d° 105, d° d° d° d° d° 95 d° d° Benjm Ives Gillman d° 150 30th d° Israel Ludlow (duplicates) 700 I was informed last week that Martin & Biggs ware then in the woods, I think they must be out Soon I am with due consideration Sir your most obedient Servent Rufus Putnam Honb" Oliver Wolcott Esqr Treasurer of the United States [Endorsed] N° 18 Marietta May 31st 1798 Rufus Putnam Surveyor General of the U. States transmitting his Accot8 to the 31" of March 1798. Recorded MEMORANDUM OF ABSENCES OF GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [MHS:Sargent Papers: AD M] [No date, 1798] Absences of Governour St. Clair from the Western Territory during which the Secretary was authorised and required to discharge his Duties and consequently involved in the Expenses of both Governour & Secretary 66— "Cf. letter of Oct. 7, 1797, ante, p. 631. 55 In the handwriting of Sargent. m Cf. Sargent to the Secretary of the Treasury, Jan. 2, 1794, ante, p. 471.
Page 648
648 TERRITORIAL PAPERS Months— Days From August 1" 1789 to Decr 24th 4 18 [24] 11th of June 1790 to 16th Septr 3 — 6 1" Feby 1791 to 29th of April 2 — 29 1" of May D° to 8th of June 1 — 8 18th August D° to 29th — 12 31" August D° to 12th Septr — 13 8th Decr 1791 to 2d of August 1793 year 7 — 26 8th of June 1794 to 23d of Decr 6 — 15 10th Jany 1795 to May 11th 3 — 2 3 6 9 May 4th 1796 to May 16th 1798 2 10 5 6 19 5 years 6 months & 19 days is, Dollars 11102—98 Cents Deduct pay of Secretary at 750 D" 4163—95 6939— 3 THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON [MHS: Pickering Papers :LPC M] Department of State, 6 July 1798. Sir The President of the United States being desirous of availing the public of your services as Secretary of the North Western Terri- tory,59 I have now the pleasure of enclosing the Commission, and of expressing the Sentiments of respect with which, I am, Sir, Your most obed. servt Timothy Pickering. William Henry Harrison Esq1 RETURN OF INHABITANTS OF HAMILTON COUNTY [MHS:Sargent Papers:C »] [July 12, 1798] Return of the number of free male inhabitants of twenty one years of age together with the total number of free inhabitants of every age as taken from the different schedules of the Constables of eleven townships in the County of Hamilton North Western Territory. 48 There is a copy of this letter in SD Archives (Dom. Letters, vol. XI). "See also Harrison to Harper, May 26, 1798, Pickering Papers (MHS). M From a typed copy.
Page 649
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 649 Free males of Total number twenty one of free Townships years of age. inhabitants Cincinnati 415 1396 Colerain 147 611 Fairfield 337 1242 Dayton 170 672 Springfield 159 753 Franklin 238 1050 Miami 86 360 Anderson 240 1099 Columbia 315 1719 Deerfield 261 1293 South Bend 25 133 2393 10328 July 12—1798. Rob't McClure. RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804 :LS] Marietta August 3rd 1798— Sir I herewith enclose my quarterly account ending with the 30th of June last with the proper Vouchers—Capt Martin I am in- formed has compleated the Survey of his District of Military land & I expect his return in a short time I find I shall be obliged to make a tour into the woods on account of some omissions & errors committed among the deputies I flatter myself however that I shall be able to return the plans of the Military lands sometime in Novr next91—the following is a list of the orders I have drawn on the treasurer of the United States since writing you on that subject, beside those credited in the enclosed account Viz— D July 11t h one in favor of Wm Skinner 100 16 D° D° EliasLanham 200 d° D° D° 250 28th D° D° Wm Skinner 180 July 28th One in favor of Wm Skinner 170 D° D° D° 150 D° D° D° 100 D° D° Zach8 Biggs 100 I have the honor to be with great respect Sir your Obt Servt Rufus Putnam Honh1 Oliver Wolcott Esqr Secretary of the Treasury "See the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Sept. 24, 1798, post, p. 651; Putnam to the Secretary of the Treasury, Oct. 13, 1798, post, p. 652.
Page 650
650 TERRITORIAL PAPERS [Endorsed] N° 20 Marietta August 3d 1798 Rufus Putnam- transmitting his quarterly acct to 30th June 1798. Recorded in Surveyor Generals Book page 54 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816: C] Treasury Department August 6th 1798. Rufus Putnam Esqr Surveyor General of the United States Sir Enclosed I transmit to you the copy of an Act of Congress, entituled "An Act authorising the grant & conveyance of a certain Lot of ground to Elie Williams." 82 In order to enable me to comply with the provisions of this Law— I will thank you to cause the value of the lot in question to be ascer- tained by impartial men—and to forward their Certificate thereof drawn up in due form to this Office, as soon as practicable.63 I am &c &c 0. W. Exa THE PRESIDENT TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE [SD:Misc. Letters :ALS] Quincy August 11. 1798 M SiR Inclosed is an Answer to the Address of Hamilton County in the North western Territory. I return the Address likewise to you that, if you think proper you may publish it. The Spark inkindling in the trans alliganean region ought to be kept alive. I am, Sir your most obedient servant John Adams Secretary of State. The Answer to Cincinnati please to deliver to Mr. Harper, if in Philadelphia, if not I shall thank you to publish it and send it on THE PRESIDENT TO INHABITANTS OF HAMILTON COUNTY [SD:Misc. Letters:ADS] [August 11 1798 M] To the Inhabitants of Hamilton County in the Territory of the United States Northwest of the River Ohio. Gentlemen I thank you for your Address of the 4th of July which has been forwarded to me by Colonel Spencer, Signed by your officers ■ July 16, 1798, 6 Stat., 36. a Answered Oct. 13, 1798, post, p. 652. "This letter is filed in the volume for August, 1799. M Filed with 1799 papers.
Page 651
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 651 as you requested. That auspicious Day on which the United States took a rank among the nations, which they have maintained with Dignity and honor for two and twenty years, was well chosen to take into Consideration the horrid depredations committed on the Property of your fellow Citizens by the Cruisers of the French Republic, the neglect to adopt measures for Reparation, and the contumelious Treatment of our Envoys, and through them of our nation. Your approbation of the part acted on the great Theatre, by your first Magistrate, by your Envoys and the great Councils of your nation, with relation to the French Republic, is very acceptable. And as all who drink the Western Waters think alike, we may hope that your sentiments are as extensive as those waters. Although you express with great Modesty your assurance that your efforts shall not be wanting to support the Independence, sovereignty and honor of our Nation, yet I am not the less confident that in case of Necessity they will not be feeble. John Adams Quincy August 11. 1798. THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO RUFUS PUTNAM [GLO:Div. E, SG, 1790-1816 :C] Treasury Department Trenton September 24th 1798 RUFUS Putnam Esquire Surveyor General of the United States Sir It has been represented to me, that a number of persons from Kentucky, have formed an intrusive settlement on the Lands lying North West of the Ohio—and above the mouth of the River Kentucky, in which the titles of the Indian Tribes have been extinguished by the Treaty with General Wayne on the third of August 1795. It being of the utmost importance to the United States, that all such lawless proceedings should be checked at the first outset—I have to request that you will immediately take measures for ascertaining how far this representation is correct, and report the result of your enquiry to me. I hope you will be able to return the plans of the military lands in November next as mentioned in your Letter of the 3rd of August last66—that I may have it in my power to make a report thereon to Congress early in the Session. Enclosed is a packet for Jacob Burnet Esqr which you will be pleased to have conveyed to him. It was received by me from Mr Boudinot67 Director of the Mint.98 I am &c &c 0. W. Ex* "Ante, p. 649. "Elias Boudinot. » Answered Oct. 13, 1798, post, p. 652.
Page 652
652 TERRITORIAL PAPERS THE POSTMASTER GENERAL TO JOSIAH MUNROE [PO:P.M. Letter Bk. G] [Post Office Department] Septemr 27th 1798 Josiah Munroe Esqr SiR I have received proposals for carrying the mail from Pittsburg by Zanes to Maysville in Kentucky on terms that I have concluded to accept & the mail from Wheeling down the Ohio will of course be dis- continued after the first of November next, it will therefore be neces- sary to establish a cross post from some part of Zanes road to Marietta. For this purpose it will be necessary to employ some trusty person either at Willstown or at Zanes on the Muskingum to open the mail and take out such papers & mails as are directed to your Office and also to place in the mail such as may be forwarded from your Office for other Offices. I have therefore to request you to employ a suitable person if one can be found there to do that business for which service I will allow him thirty dollars a year being the same that is now paid for like services at Preston. The person thus employed must take & subscribe the oaths of which I enclose you a form & return them to me. Inclosed is a key which is to be delivered him to enable him to open the mail. The riders from Pittsburg & from Maysville are to meet at Zanes every Monday evening and I should wish a person living there may be employed if one of proper character can be found. I wish you also to contract with some person to carry the mail between your Office & Willstown or Zanes on the best terms that you can not going higher than at the rate of six dollars a mile by the year counting the distance one way; for that purpose. I have enclosed a blank contract & bond which are to be filled out & excuted by the person with whom you contract & returned to this Office68 I am &c J H RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta October 13th 1798 Sir Your favor of the 24th ult—70 is before me: I will take measures imediately to comply with your request: relative to those intrusive Settlers you mention— In reguard to the plans of the Military lands I am under the disa- greable & mortifying necessity of informing you that I have not to this moment ben able to obtain Mr Martins returns: nor do I know when I Shall be able to obtain them—on the 3d of august71 I wrote you that I was informed he had compleated the Survey of his District "See the Postmaster General to Munroe, Mar. 1, 1799, post, ill, 15. ™ Ante, p. 651. 7 1 Ante, p. 649.
Page 653
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 653 & that I expected his returns in a short time: on the 18th of August I wrote him in the most pressing maner to bring them in as soon as possible & on the 31" of august he answered my letter on the 18th: in which he Sais " I have not yet compleated the returns of my Survey but shall bring them to your office on monday the 8th of Sept, no other business has in the lest taken my attention from the returns, the great distence I have Surveyed on the River makes the protraction tedious ", but the 8th of September passed with [out] reciveing the plans or hear- ing from him; and notwithstanding I have, Sence, twice wrote him on the Subject;72 pressing on him the necessity of my haveing the returns imediately, or other-wise I Should not be able to comply with my en- gagements to you, yet to neither of these letters have I recived any answer: whether he is Sick, or dead, or gon into the woods to correct Some error he may have discovered in his Work I cannot tell, however if he does not bring or Send his returns by the next Mail I shall go my Self or Send to enquire the reasons of his delay & endevor to obtain the proper returns or other papers from him, when no time will be lost in compleating the plans and Lodgeing them in your office; but I almost dispair of doing this before Some time in the month of December78 your Letter of August 6th 74 respecting the aprizment of a certain Lot of ground proposed to be granted to Eilie Williams 75 was duely recived and the business put in train but I have had no return. The following is a list of the orders I have drawn on the Treasurer of the united States sence writeing you on that Subject viz 1798 August 9th one ordor in favor of Dudley Woodbridge for Dollars 200, Sept 29 d° d° d° d° d° d° 200, October 1, d° d° d° Francis D'hé Court 60, 12th d° d° d° Earl Sproat— 186,96 I am Sir with due respect your most obedient Servent Rufus Putnam The honb" Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasury [Addressed] HonhI Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasury of the U S at Philadelphia or Trinton Marietta 15 Octr Free [Endorsed] [N° 21] Marietta October 13th 1798 Rufus Putnam Surveyr General—stating that Mr Martin had omitted to make return of his part of the Survey of Military Lands. Recorded in S. G" Book page 55 "None of the letters referred to has been found. "Cf. the Secretary of the Treasury to Putnam, Mar. 14, 1797, ante, p. 591. » Ante, p. 650. « July 16, 1798, 6 Stat. 36.
Page 654
654 TERRITORIAL PAPERS RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta October 30th 1798 Sir Sence reciveing your Lette of the 24th of September I have had informattion, which may be depended on, that many persons have Set down on the Lands of the United States Northwest of Ohio: per- ticulerly on that tract Westerly of the Ohio and the big Miami Rivers & above the mouth of Kentucky River in which the Titles of the Indian Tribes have ben extinguished And also on the Eastern Side of the Sioto River: It is Supposed these intrusive Settlers in these two district amount to three hundred Families: it is Said they are chiefly emigrants from Kentucky & that they are daly increeseing; the pro- fessed designe of the first of these Settlers was to purchas the lands on which they set down whenever they Should be offerred for Sale by the United States, but of Late there are Some especially among th e more lately arrived emigrants from Kentucky who Say they mean to hold the Lands by Settling or without purchasing provided their numbers Should increase So far as to give them a prospect of prospect of Suc- ceeding in a measure of that land78— I do not under Stand that these hostile intentions are generally and publicly avowed but I have it from a gentleman of whose veracity I cannot doubt that Such Sentiments have ben expressed by some of them— Besides these kind of Settlers in the places above described there are prehaps fifty or more Scattering families on the Waters of the Muskingum river & in other parts of the country to the Eastward of the Sioto 77 who I believe have no connection with the others nor do I concive there is any mischief to be apprehended from them except the damage they may do in cultivateing the land & destroying the timber belonging to the public I am Sir with great Respect your obedient Servt Rufus Putnam Honb" Oliver Wolcott Esquir Secretary of the Treasury of the United States [Addressed] Honhl Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treas- ury of the U S at Trinton or Philadelphia [Endorsed] N° 23 Marietta October 30th 1798 Rufus Putnam- Surveyor Gen1 of the U. States Recorded in S. G. page 57. file « See petitions [July], 1799, post, III, 35 et seq. 77 See petition of inhabitants of the Scioto, Feb. 1,1798, ante, p. 638.
Page 655
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 655 PETER AUDRAIN 78 TO GOVERNOR ST. CLAIR [OSL:St. Clair Papers :ALS] Detroit, November 1, 1798. Sir In obedience to your Excellency's orders, I have requested a Magistrate of each Township to cause the enumeration of the free males Inhabitants of Wayne county, to be taken as soon as possible. L was lucky in finding an opportunity for Michilimackinac and receive the Return. I now have the honor to inclose you a general Return of the free Males of the age of Twenty-one years and upwards, of the four town- ships of Wayne county. Your Excellency will See that in the return of Michilimackinac, there are 700 Engagés or hired men to merchants for the Indian trade, over and above the Residenters of that place. it is, as I am informed by the Magistrates at that post, about one-half only of the Engagés Resorting thither, every summer, but the other half is composed of Canadians coming from Montreal, of course not intitled to the rights of Citizens of the United States.79 There are many people omitted in the Returns, particularly in Sargent's and Hamtramck's Townships, as you will See by the Return Certified by the Sheriff of the County, &c— I Beg leave to assure Your Excellency that no time has been lost Since the receipt of your orders, and that no opportunity before this, has offered to forward the Return to the Seat of Government. very little difficulty has been experienced in taking the enumeration of the people, but a very great one will exist in finding Men fit to represent the County in general assembly, if organized, the best informed, in general, are the british Subjects, by their own election, of course, not eligible, and I do not Know one Single Canadian who understands english enough to be a representative. we have three or four Gentlemen who would do very well, but their occupations are Such that I am afraid will not admit of their absence; the Canadians now feel for want of education, and are anxious for an opportunity of getting their children taught, to Read and write, and especially the English language. I think it my duty to inform Your Excellency that the Comman- dandt of this post has granted an acre of Ground on the Commons Joining the Town, to be used as a burying-ground for the Roman Catholics; this grant answers a very good purpose, as their old burying-ground Joining their church, and within the pickets, is so full that it is a real publick Nuisance, and had been presented as Such by Several Grand Juries. 78 Prothonotary at Detroit. A portion of his official correspondence with Sargent is among the Sargent Papers (MHS). 79 See Journal Exec. Procs., Dec. 14, 1798, post, III, 517.
Page 656
656 TERRITORIAL PAPERS I have heard that the Indians in the Neighborhood of St. Joseph— Seem disposed to do mischief. my information is from James May, Esqr one of our Justices, who lately received a letter from his friend Mr. Burnet,80 mercht at St. Joseph. this information has been com- municated to the Commandant of this post, who probably has taken the necessary Steps to counteract the Maneuvers of the Wicked Indians. all is quiet here; Indians are generally [MS. torn] gone to their Winter Grounds; we have less of them at this moment than any period Since I have been in Detroit. I have the honor to be with great Respect Your Excellency's very humble and most obedient Servant Peter Audrain. Detroit 1" November 1798 His Excellency, the Governor of the Territory. [Endorsed] From Peter Audrain Nov. 1. 1798. RUFUS PUTNAM TO THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY [GLO:Div. E, Ohio SG, vol. 64, 1797-1804: ALS] Marietta November 13th 1798 Sir Enclosed you have the plan & apprisement of that certain lot of ground described in an act of Congress entitled "an Act Authorizeing the grant and conveyance of a certain Lot of ground to Elie Williams" 81 made I presume agreably to your instructions of the Sixth of august last— In my last account of bills drawn on the Treasurer there was an omission of one bill dated october 15th in favor of Joseph Lincoln for Dollr" 200, And sence the 30th ultimo I have drawn the following viz— November 9th one in favor of Wm Skiner for— 100, d° d° d° d° d° for— 90,40 Mr Martin arrived at Marietta this day I shall proceed imediately to examine his returns of Survey; I hope they they will prove correct & if So I expect to compleat the plans of the Military lands in a month or Six weeks— I am Sir with great Respect your obedient Servent Rufus Putnam Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasury [Addressed] Honh1 Oliver Wolcott Esquire Secretary of the Treasury of the united States at Philadelphia 80 William Burnett, for whom see Quaife (ed.), Askin Papers (BHR, I), 353; Mich. Hist. Colls., xxx, 85 et seq. "6 Stat. 36. This refers to the sale of a plot of ground in Cincinnati.
Page 657
NORTHWEST TERRITORY 657 [Endorsed] N° 24 Marietta Novemr 13th 1798 Rufus Putnam Survr Gen1 transmitting plat of the Lot of Land on which Elliot & Williams had erected certain buildings with an appraisent of the same. Recorded in S. G. page 58 Inform Mr Williams of the result & that on payment, of the sum awarded measures will be taken for granting the Patent—OW CONNECTICUT: CESSION OF JURISDICTION OVER THE WESTERN RESERVE [LC:CC Papers, West. Land Cessions :DS] [December 31, 1798] To all who shall see these presents We the Underwritten James Hillhouse and Uriah Tracy Senators in the Congress of the United States of America duly and con- stitutionally chosen by the Legislature of the State of Connecticut, send Greeting. Whereas the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut begun and held at New Haven in said State on the second Thursday of October in the year of our Lord one Thousand seven hundred and Ninety seven passed an Act entitled "An Act for the purpose of ceding to the United States the Jurisdiction of certain Territory therein described" in the words following to wit: Whereas this State on the second day of September in the year of our Lord one Thousand seven hundred and Ninety five sold to the Connecticut land Company all that Tract of Land belonging to this State lying West of the West line of Pennsylvania as claimed by that State82— And whereas said Company have expressed their desire that this State should cede their Jurisdiction of said Territory to the United States that the same may be included within the Government established by Congress North West of the Ohio. And whereas it appears to this Assembly expedient that such Cession be made: therefore;— Be it enacted by the Governor and Council and House of Representa- tives in General Court assembled that the Senators of this State in the Congress of the United States be and they are hereby authorised impowered and directed to execute in the name and behalf of this State a Deed or Deeds releasing to the United States the Jurisdiction of the Territory aforesaid to the end that the Congress may be enabled to extend over the said Territory such Government or Jurisdiction as 82 Bates, "The Connecticut Gore Land Company," A.H.A. Rept., 1898, p. 157. 126850—34—vol. 2 43
Page 658
658 TERRITORIAL PAPERS now is or may be exercised over the North Western Territory of the United States83 Now therefore Know Ye, that we James Hillhouse and Uriah Tracey Senators aforesaid by virtue of the Authority and power committed to us by said Act, and in the name and for and in behalf of said State do by these presents release to the United States the Jurisdiction of the Territory aforesaid for the purpose aforesaid. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names and affixed our Seals in the Senate Chamber at Philadelphia this Thirty first day of December in the year of our Lord one Thousand seven hundred and Ninety Eight and in the Twenty second year of the Independence of the United States of America— Signed Sealed and delivered James Hillhouse— [L.s.] in presence of— Uriah Tracy [l.s.] Sam: A. Otis Robt Heysham [Endorsed] Deed of Cession by the State of Connecticut of certain Territory called the Western Reserve of Connecticut. Decemr 31" 1798 Leg: 5' Cong: 3d Sess:M 83 Antecedent to and following this action, Senator Tracy of Connecticut was paving the way for acceptance of jurisdiction by Congress (Annals, 5 Cong., 2 sess., 486, 487, 502-503, 618; 3 sess., 2198, 2203, 2219, 2221, 2227, 2230). The bill for acceptance passed by the Senate was postponed by the House, Feb. 26, 1799, to the next session, ibid., p. 3017. 8< See act of Apr. 28, 1800, post, III, 84. For a continuation of these papers, see volume III, Northwest Territory—Continued
End of Section 2. Continue to next section or 
Index
Page 659
INDEX
Page 660
INDEX NOTE With respect to names of persons an effort has been made in com- piling the index to correct deficiencies in spelling which were due either to ignorance or carelessness, both common attributes of the period. Illegible writing in the original manuscript has however often proven too baffling for solution. Instances of doubtful, or known, incorrect spelling could not always be clarified. The relevant census records of 1800 have disappeared, and documents of legal record and approved genealogical data have not always been either available or more reliable than the present sources. Wherever practical considerations permitted, citation to the correct spelling of a given proper name has been made in the footnotes; additional names have been identified in the index, and variants found throughout the text have been assembled in parentheses. 660
Page 661
INDEX Abbot, James, appd. j.p., 568. Abrams, Bazil, s. petition, 640. Abuniere, G., s. petition, 242. Achiout (Half Town), Six Nations chief, arrives at Ft. Harmar, 156-157; s. treaty, 184. A-coo-la-tha (Little Fox), Wea chief, s. treaty, 532. Adams, John, 204, 298, 342, 389, 650, 651. See also President. Adams, Thomas, see Pee-ke£-t616- mund. Adams County, bound., 612; creation, 612-613, 618. Administration of justice, discussed, 432, 433-434. A-gin, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Alare (Allarie), Louis, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 285. Alary (Alarry, Alarie), Clement, land claim, 264, 266, 268, 272. Alary (Allary), Jean Baptiste, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 268; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Alary, widow, Kas. census, 258. Albany (N.Y.), 3, 561. Albert, —, s. petition, 425. Alden, Roger, 198; letter to Pres., 204; note, 204; s. endorsement, 187; transmits exec. jour, to Pres., 204; witness Conn. cession, 24. Alexandria (Va.), arrival Scioto settlers, 423,427. Allarie, see Alare. Allary, see Alary. A-ma-cun-sa (Little Beaver), Wea chief, s. treaty, 532. Amelin, Loran, see Hamelin, Laurent. Ame-na-he-han (Captain Crow), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. American settlers, address to Harmar, 65-66; attitude towards Fr. surren. lands, 67; land claims, 69; emigrate to Sp. ter., 168; grants sought, at 111., 69, Vin., 66; invited to settle at Vin., 66; petition from 111., 68-70, Vin., 66; subject to Indian depreds., 325. Anachout (The Wasp), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Anderson, see Kik-tha-we-nund. Anderson (Hamilton Co.), pop. fig., 649. Andr6, Drusilla, land claim, 274. Andrez, Joseph, land claim, 285. A-ne-wa-saw, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Anse a la Graise (New Madrid), 214, 215, 231-232, 307; Morgan's actions at, 247. Antaya, see Pelletier dit Antaya. Aqueia (Bandy Legs), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Ardouin, Etienne, see Hardouin. Argi'lleupe, D., letters mentioned to St. Clair, 522, Symmes, 522. Armesto, Andrew Lopes, 214. Armstrong, Lt. John, note, 121; rept. of, transmitted, 121. Armstrong, Capt. John, complaint re, 379. Armstrong, —, on comm. U.S.-N.Y.- Mass. bound., 111. Army, U.S., see Troops, U.S. Arquancas, Arkansas post (Ft. Charles III), 288, 289, 290. Articles of Compact, N.W. ord., 46-49. Articles of Confederation, mentioned, 3. Atchenewaugh, s. Wab. agree., 375. Atchison, George, s. petition, 253. At-si-me-th6, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Attorney General, Bradford: letters to Sec. State, 477, 478, 495, Sec. Treas., 520-521; opinions re: application ex- cise tax, 520-521, donation lands, Vin., 477, 478, 479; opinions re- quested re: Gal. petition, 443, exec. jour., 315, 318; Lee: letter to Sec. State, 558; opinion re President's power to appt. Indian commrs., 558; Randolph: 415, 444; letters from Lear, 318, 351, St. Clair, 319-320; letters mentioned to Pres., 416. See also St. Clair, Arthur, letters. Au Boeuf (Au Beuf) River, 129, 130. Aubremane, Francois, land claim, 263. Audrain, Peter, letter to St. Clair, 655- 656; transmits rept. on Wayne Co., 655. Auger, —, s. petition, 424. Au Glaize River, Indian cession, 527. Au-goo-sha-way, Ott. chief, 537; s. treaty, 533. Autran, —, s. petition, 424. Au Vase River, bound. Morgan grant, 113, 130. Aw-me-yee-ray, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 532. Awpaighchenecaugh, Wea chief, s. Wab. agree., 375. 661
Page 662
662 INDEX Bache, Richard, note, 218. Bach6, widow of John Francis, land claim, 256. Bad Bird, see Mash-i-pi-nash-i-wish. Baillarjon, Nicolaus, land claim, 285. Bailly, —, s. petition, 425. Baird (Beard), Samuel, surveyor, 284; appd. to survey 111. lands, 323-326; surveys lands, Pr. du Roch., 276-277. Baker's Station, no. settlers, 470. Baldwin, Abraham, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 130, 139, 140, 144, 146-147. Bandy Legs, see Aqueia. Bankson, Benjamin, jr., 492; note, 9; witness Va. cession, 9, 12. Barbau, Jean Baptiste, jr., s. petitions, 279, 281. Barbau, Jean Baptiste, sr., to address St. Clair, 278, 279. Barbau, —, s. petition, 281. Barbee, Gen., 485; letter mentioned from Pickering, 484. Barlow, Joel, 466, 468; appd. agent Scioto co., 417, 419, 420; procs. as agent, 422, 426. Barnwell, Robert, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 425, 436. Baron, widow of Gabriel, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 272. Barrois (Baroy), Francois, jr., land claim, 285. Barrois (Baroye), Francois, sr., land claim, 285. Barton, William, declines appt. as ter. judge, 217. Barutel (Barulel) dit Thoulouse, Blaise, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 256. Barutel, Joseph, fils, Kas. census, 258. Basinet, Angelic, widow of Francois, land claim, 286. Bastille, —, Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 424. Baudot, Laperouze, s. petition, 425. Bauinier, —, s. petition, 424. Baulieu, sec Beaulieu. B.iulon, Amable, land claim, 285. Bauvais (Beauvais, Beouvais), Jean Baptiste (St. Jam), claims former Jesuit property, 330; claim granted, 341. Bauvais, J. S. G., s. petition, 68. Bauvais, Vitale, s. petition, 68. Beard, see Baird. Beatty, Capt. E., witness Wab. agree., 375. Beau Bien, jr., see Cuillerier dit Barrois, Jean Baptiste. Beaufit (Beufait), Louis (Lewis), appd. j.p., 568-569; witness treaty, 534. Beaulieu (Baulieu), Jean, s. petition, 242. Beaulieu, Michele, s. petitions, 242, 281. Beaulieu, widow of Michele, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 265, 266, 273; s. petition, 281. Beauvais (Beavis, Beauvis), Alexis, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 256. Beauvet, Rene, s. petitions, 250, 281. Beaver Creek, 160; dist. from Cuya- hoga R., 158. Becasse, Jean Baptiste, land claim, 270. Becker, B., s. Vin. address, 65. Beckley, John, clerk H.R., 204, 298, 395, 396, 557. Beckwith, Sir George, letter men- tioned to McHenry, 561. Becquet (Bequet), Andre, land claim, 267. Becquet (Bequet), widow, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Belle Fountain Creek, 274, 275, 276. Belle Riviere, 243. See also Ohio River. Belleu, Marguerite, kidnapped girl to be returned to, 234-235. Bellevill (Va.), men killed by Indians at, 293. Bellew, Francis, land claim, 274. Bellew, Timothy, land claim, 274 Belli, John, Dep. Q.M.Gen., letter mentioned to Sec. War, 411. Bel Pre\ 338; dist. to Gal., 489, Little Guyandatta, 489, Wheeling, 489; no. settlers, 470. Benson, Egbert, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 28, 29, 54. Bequet, see Becquet. Bergand, Charles, land claim, 285. Bergeron, Jean Baptiste, Cah. census, 259. Bergeron (Bergeront), Louis, Cah. census, 259; s. petition, 282. Bergeron, widow, land claim, 270. Berte, —, Gal. prop., 506. Berthelot (Bertolot), —, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 425. Berthelot, —, s. petition, 425. Bertrand, —, s. peitition, 425. Bethlehem (Pa.), 147, 592; Moravians at, 86. Bettie, Joseph, s. petition, 281. Bienvenu (Bienvenus) dit Delisle, An- toine, fils, Kas. census, 257. Bienvenu, Antoine, pere, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 254; s. petition, 281. Big Bale of a Kettle, see Sessewa. Big Beaver River, death of Parsons in, 222. Big Bottom, acct. of massacre, 337-338. Big Cross, see Gyasota. Biggs, William, s. petition, 253. Biggs, Zaccheus, surveyor, 614, 615, 645, 647; orders from Putnam, 606; pay. to, 649; surveys behind schedule, 643. Big Miami River, portage, 444. See also Great Miami River. Big Sandy River, mail boats to meet near, 502. Big Tree, see Kiandogewa.
Page 663
INDEX 663 Biguier (Bieget, Biquier) dit Grosle (Groled), Joseph, land claim, 270, 271, 273; s. petition, 250. Biguier (Biquet) dit Grottel (Girole, Grole, Grosli), Louis, land claim, 266, 268, 270, 271; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 281. Billet (Billett) ait Beausoleil, Pierre, letter from Sec. State, 440; s. peti- tion, 281. Binette, John Baptiste, land claim, 285. Bird, Ens. Ross, witness Wab. agree., 375. Biron, Benjamin, see Byrun. Biron, Henry, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 266, 269, 270, 271, 273; s. petition, 242, 281. Bithery, —, s. petition, 424. Black Hoof, see Cut-the-we-ka-saw. Black King, see Le-man-tan-quis. Blain, see Blin. Blanchard, John, clerk, ter. leg., action against Harrison, 402; complaint discussed, 400. Blast, The, see Sawedowa. Blay (Blais), Joseph, s. petitions, 278, 281. Blin (Blain), George, land claim, 264. Blin (Blain), widow of George, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264,265, 273. Bloomfield, Joseph, member N.J. Land co., 129. Blount, Gov. William (S.W.T.), letter mentioned from Sec. War, 409. Blue Jacket, 537, see Wey-a-pier-sen- waw. Blue River, Indian attack reported, 301, 307. Board of Police (Marietta), should con- trol sale of liquor to Indians, 137. Board of Treasury, 21, 30, 56, 63, 197, 213, 295, 334; accts. of St. Clair submitted to, 437; action re: Morgan grant, 109, 129, 139, 140, 144, Scioto co. pur., 85-88, 418, Symmes pur., 344, 345, 388-389, 490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 496; authorization of, and duties re land surveys and sales, 14-18, 24-25, 54-55, 78, 88, 96, 113, 122, 135; delays pay. Sargent's salary, 190; duties re Indian affs., 34, 51,195; indenture with Cutler and Sargent, 85-88, Ohio co., 80-84; letters from Morgan, 156, St. Clair, 98-99; letter mentioned from Cutler and Sargent, 61; letters to Pres. of Cong., 61, 74; recommends alter. land ord., 25; repts. re: land sales, 24-25, 110-111, memorial Parsons and Varnum, 124- 125, petition Flint and Parker, 77, Morgan, 109-110; to furnish supplies for. army, 34. Boats, character of, on Ohio R., 595, 610. See also Postal service. Boismenu (Boismanu, Boismence), Nicholas, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 265; s. petition, 281. Boisvert (Boivert), Joseph, land claim, 269; s. petition, 250. Boltinghouse, Daniel, s. petition, 640. Bond, Shadrach, land claim, 275; s. petition, 253. Bonneau, Charles, land claim, 285. Boone (Boon), Daniel, s. petition, 253. Bordeleau, Antoine, sr., land claim, 285. Bordeleau, Michel, land claim, 285. Bosseron, Francois, magistrate, 283; land claim, 285; s. address to Sar- gent, 292. Boston, 642. Boucher, Jacques Timothe, Sieur de Monbreun (De Numbrun), made land grants in 111., 325. Boucher, Vital, land claim, 285. Boudinot, Elias, 651; statement re Gal., 469-470. Bounty lands, resols. re, 76, 134-135. See also Lands. Bouteillet (Boutiliete), Jacque, s. peti- tion, 278. Bouvet (Bouvel), Ren6, land claim, 269; Pr. duRoch. census, 261. Boyer, Antoine, Cah. census, 259. Boyer, Louis, jr., land claim, 285. Boyer, Marie, land claim, 285. Bradford, William, Atty. Gen., 477, 478. See also Attorney General. Bradshaw, —, view re treaty Wab. Indians, 414. Brady (Bredy), Thomas, Cah. census, 259. Branchant, Pierre, land claim, 267, 271. Branchon, —, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Brant, Joseph, 157, 164; attitude towards U.S., 538, 539; Brit. pen- sioner, 168; refuses to attend Ft. Harmar treaties, 165. Brazaux family, note, 68. Brazaux, Fr. Conget de, s. letter to Harmar, 68. Brazil, Sp. gov. threatens to send St. Marie to, 289. Brearley, David, member N.J. Land co., 129. Bredy, see Brady. Briand, Mons. Jean Olivier, administers church at Cah., 201. Broken Tomahawk, see Otachsaka. Broken Twig, see Tewanias. Bronis, —, s. petition, 425. Brouillet, Francois, land claim, 285. Brouillet, Louis, land claim, 285. Brouillet, Michel, land claim, 285. Brown, Dr. Charles, opinion of Sargent re, 399. Brown, James, s. petition, 640. Brown, Senator John, 502; attitude towards petition, 462, 463; com.: Ind. affs., 105, U.S.-N.Y.-Mass. bound., 111. Bruff, Capt. James, 561. Brush Creek, petition mentioned from settlers, 612. Bruynier, F., s. petition, 425.
Page 664
664 INDEX Bryan (Bryon), James, land claim, 275; s. petition, 253. Buchet, —, commr. of 111., 261-262. Buchong, Valentine, s. petition, 640. Buet, —, widow, land claim, 272. Buffaloe, Capt., see Kish-ko-pe-kund. Buff aloe Creek, 293; Fr. at, 337; need for post, 571. Bu-kon-ge-he-las (Buchongelas), Dela. chief, 537; s. treaty, 531. Bullard (Buland, Buleard, Buliard), Joseph, land claim, 264, 265, 268, 272. Buntin (Bunting), Robert, 300; note, 284. Bureau, P., letter mentioned to P.M. Gen., 608; s. affidavit, 600; s. peti- tion, 424. Burke, Edmund, vie. gen. Upper Can., letter mentioned to Wyandots, 518- 519. Burnet, Jacob, 651. Burnett, William, 656. Burns, John, s. petition, 640. Burr, Aaron, 506; member N.J. land co., 129. Burrall, Charles, Asst. P.M.Gen., 540, 610; letter mentioned to Graham, 541; letters to Pope, 633-634, W.St. Clair, 633, Thacher, 646. Buteau, Charles, land claim, 272. Buteau, Joseph, Cah. census, 259. Buteau (Buteaux), Pierre, s. petition, 281. Butler, Col. John, Brit. Indian agent, 537. Butler, Gen. Richard, 26, 89, 191; commr. Ft. Mcintosh treaty, 174; instrs. mentioned to, 377; letter men- tioned from Indians, 119; letter mentioned to St. Clair, 143; re Indian negots., 90,131,153,156-157, 159; witness treaties, 179, 184. Buto, Pierre, s. petition, 250. Buyat, Antoine, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 254. Buzenet, M., s. petition, 425. Byrun (Biron), Benjamin, land claim, 275. Cabassier (Cabasier), Antoine, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Cabassier (Cabotie), Baptiste (Padiste), land claim, 270, 271, 272; s. petition, 250. Cabassier, Charles, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Cabassier, Francis, land claim, 272. Cabassier, Joseph, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Cabassier (Cabolier, Cabatiez), Pierre (Piere), land claim, 269; Pr. du Pont census, 261; s. petitions, 250, 281. Cabassier, widow, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Cabassier (Cabatie), Xavier (Exavier, Havre), Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. Cachunwasse (Twenty Canoes), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Cadot, —, s. petition, 424. Cadron, Charles, Cah. census, 259. Cageaga (Dogs Round the Fire), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Cahokia (Cahos, Kahokia), 112, 256, 264, 269, 272, 331, 335, 445, 487; census, 259; description, 326; im- provements, 140, 145; land question, 114, 261-262, 263, 326, 547, 578; letter from Grav6 to inhabs., 199- 202; memorials and petitions, 72-73, 92-94, 241-242, 249-252; not. pub. appd., 329; St. Clair at, 325; status Catholic church and Seminary mis- sion, 93, 199-202, 261-262; trade conditions, 331, 516, 571. See also Illinois; Prairie du Pont. Cahokia district, land claims in, 263- 276. Cahokia Indians, abandon country, 547. Campbell, Col. Arthur, letter men- tioned to Lt. Gov. Wood of Va., 409. Campeau (Campaun), —, Cah. census, 259. Canada, 48, 202, 209, 331, 360, 368, 537; bound., 172; Brit, agents from, 367; customary law in West, 205; policy of govt., 441; routes of traders, 570, 571. Canada, Nicolas Henault, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 256. Canadian inhabitants, grants recom- mended, 114; guarantees to, 7-8. Capatie, Badiste, s. petition, 282. Capatie, Francois, s. petition, 282. Cape au Gras, 75. Capou, Antoine, Kas. census, 258. Captena Creek, 585. Carbouneaux, Louis Pierre Francois, Kas. census, 258; note, 329. Cardinal, Jacque, land claim, 285. Cardinal, John (Jean) Baptiste, land claim, 273, 285. Cardinal, Marie, widow of Nicolaus, land claim, 286. Carnus, Francois, s. petition, 278. Carpentier, Lewis Anthony, acct. of, 599, 600; s. petition, 598. Carrington, Edward, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 28, 29, 35, 54, 76, 98, 105, 110, 112, 117, 130. Carroll, Charles, proposed as Indian commr., 439. . Carter, Moses, land claim, 285. Cartier, Pierre, sr., land claim, 285. Casterland, Peter, s. petition, 253. Castle St. Clair, Detroit fort, 168. Catteron, —, s. petition, 425. Caty, Antoine, land claim, 285.
Page 665
INDEX 665 Cayasutha, Indian chief, conveys in- formation, 160-161; urges relief of Chippewa prisoners, 157. Cayuga Indians, 157. Cecire (Cesirre), Joseph, Cah. census, 259. Census reports, Cah., 259, Kas., 257- 258, Pr. du Pont, 260-261, Vin., 285-287. Chabo, Pierre, s. petition, 424. Chabot, Joseph, land claim, 285. Chacowaatagh, s. Wab. agree., 375. Chafan, Isaac, s. petition, 253. Chafan, William, s. petition, 253. Chamberland, Lewis, land claim, 255. Cha-mung, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Chandivert, —, s. petition, 424. Chanterlle, —, s. petition, 425. Chapard, Nicholaus, land claim, 286. Chapin, Gen. Israel, letters mentioned to Sec. War, 487, 538; repts. news of Six Nations, 487. Charbonneau, Jacob, land claim, 285. Charly (Charles), widow of Michel, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 267. Charmond, 263. Charpentier, John, land claim, 285. Charpentier, .—, s. petition, 424. Chartier, Joseph, land claim, 285. Chartier (Chartie), Michel, land claim, 269; s. petition, 250. Chartran, Jean Baptiste, land claim, 267, 268, 270, 271, 272; Pr. du Pont census, 261; s. petitions, 250, 282. Chartran, Thomas, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Chartran, Touisaint, Pr. du Pont cen- sus, 261. Chartran, widow, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Chatel (Chattel), Louis, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 266, 273. Chatingy dit Lacoutre, Joseph, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Chaudiver, —, Gal. prop., 505. Checunememshaw, s. Wab. agree., 375. Che-go-nick-ska, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 532. Chemin, —, s. petition, 424. Chemin, —, s. petition, 425. Chenier, Jacques, Kas. census, 258. Cherean, —, s. petition, 425. Cherokee Indians, 151, 361; rels. with U.S., 193, 360, 365; representations at Detroit, 301. Cherokee River (Riviere des Cheraquis, Tennessee), 231, 232. Cheyawe, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Chicago (Chikago), Indian cession, 527; trading post, 570. Chicago River, 527, 528; route of Brit. traders, 331. Chickasaw Bluffs, post recommended, 571. Chickasaw Indians, 225, 226, 364, 409; rels. with U.S., 360, 382, 409, 411. Chickasaw Lake, 288. Chippewa Indians, 121, 219, 220, 360, 361; bound., 445; compensation, 529; land cession, 527; murder charges, 136-137; treaties, 174-181, 525-535. Chi-sau-gan, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Chishekoa (Wood Bug), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Chisholm, Hugh, Kas. census, 258. Choctaw Indians, 225, 360, 409; rels. with U.S., 382, 409, 411. Chretien (Cretien), Pierre, land claim, 267, 273. Chretien (Cretien), Pierre, heirs of, land claim, 266, 270, 271. Christian Indians, 63, 86; memorial to Cong. re, 147-148. See also Mora- vians, United Brethren. Cincinnati, 564, 626, 650; dist. from Detroit, 620, Washington, Ky., 501; mail service, 501, 536, 539-541, 542; no. settlers, 470, 649; seat of govt., 312, 574, 578, 579; ter. leg. called at, 459. See also Fort Washington; Hamilton County. Civil government, superior to mil. authority, 401. Civil law, absence of, noted, 57. Clark, Abraham, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 98, 111, 117, 146, 148, 153, 156. Clark, George Rogers, 243; commr. Ft. Mcintosh, 174; land grant, 8, 159, 445, 528. Clarke, M. St. Clair, 393. Clarksville, no. settlers, 470. Claypoole, D.C., printer, 366. Clermont, Benjamin, land claim, 265, 269, 273. Coch-ke-pogh-Togh, Miami chief, Eel R. tribe, s. treaty, 532. Cochran, Hugh, s. petition, 640. Coder, Francois, land claim, 285. Coder, Louis, land claim, 285. Coder, Susanna, widow of Pierre, land claim, 286. Codron, Charles, s. petition, 281. Colerain (Hamilton Co.), pop. fig., 649. Columbia (Hamilton Co.), pop. fig., 470, 649. Commerce, 111. country, discussed, 330-334. Common law, 46; extension to ter., 41. Compagnot, Francois, land claim, 285. Comte (Comt), Aym6, s. petition, 279. Congress, see Continental Congress; United States Congress. Connecticut, cession west. lands, 22- 24, 212, 549, 592, 657-658; settlers from, 206. Connolly, Col. John, actions watched, 166-167, 188; letter mentioned to Gen. Morgan, 167. Constable, William, member Scioto co., 467. Continental army, lands for soldiers, 27-28.
Page 666
666 INDEX Continental Congress, acts and resols. mentioned, 6-7, 10, 17, 19, 34, 39, 50, 51, 59, 61, 63, 65, 70, 72, 78, 96-97, 98, 110, 123, 129, 134, 136, 138, 139, 140, 144, 145, 146, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 158, 162, 163, 190, 191, 194, 197, 213, 216, 279, 296, 315, 316, 318, 321, 322, 323, 324, 329, 341-342, 389, 391, 400, 420-421, 445, 447, 466, 467, 477, 490-498, 581, 583, 589, 590; acts, ords. and resols. re: bounty lands and Indian treaties, 50-51, 76-77, contract with Mor- gan, 144-145, govt. ter., 39-50, inhabs. Vin., 145-146, land boun- ties, 134-135, land sales, 12-18, regulat. Indian affs., 19-22, sale of lands, 78, treaty with Indians, 360- 361; com. repts. re: appt. surveyors, 135, alter, in Morgan contract, 139— 140, bound. U:S.-N.Y.-Mass., I11, Cutler-Sargent proposals, 63-64, 111.- Wab. Land co., 115-117, Indian rels., 56-58, land reserved by Va., 155- 156, land surveys, 135, memorial of Morgan, 112-115, memorials from Vin. and 111., 105-109, 149-150, sale lands, 54-56: land cessions to, by: Conn., 22-24, Mass., 10-12, N.Y., 3-5, Va., 6-9, 172-173; letters from Bd. Treas., 61, Sec. War, 95-98. See also United States Congress. Contomaumgaugh, s. Wab. agree., 375. Cook, John, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 257. Cooke, Josiah Platt, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 76. Coon (Khun, Kuhn), Capt. Abraham, Wyan. chief, delivers messages, 121; sends message to Gen. Butler, 131. Corn, scarcity of, at Vin., 229-230. Cornieyer, Pierre, land claim, 285. Cornplanter, in Ft. Harmar negots., 156-157, 164; mission to Miami Indians, 364-365. See also Gyant- waia. Coroners, law apptg., mentioned, 171. Cory, James, s. petition, 640. Cory, Joseph, s. petition, 640. Cory, Nathan, s. petition, 640. Cory, Stephen, s. petition, 640. Coste, Louis, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 265, 270, 273; s. petition, 242. Cott, Philip, s. petitions, 621, 636. Cottinault (Cot. Cotinos), Baptiste, s. petitions, 278, 281. Coudreniere, Peyroux de la, Sp. com- mand. St. Genevieve, letter from St. Clair, 232-233; letter to St. Clair, 231-232. Council Keeper, see Sciahowa. County-Lieutenant (Va.), power of, 284. Coupin, —, s. petition, 425. Courier (Courrier), Francois, Cah. lands, 264. Courset, —, s. petition, 424. Court of Common Pleas, 403; addit. judges, 432, 433; character, 434; comms. changed, 456; organized, 152, 328-329; tenure judges, 432. Court of Enquiry, requested by St. Clair, 376, 378, 383. Court of Oyer and Terminer, 403. Courts, duties, qualifs. and terms, 41-42. Courville, Pierre, land claim, 263. Coutien, Baties, witness treaty, 534. Cox, John, member N.J. Land co., 129. Craig, Major Isaac, agent postal ser- vice, 483, 505, 550, 596; instrs. to, 481-482; letters from P.M. Gen., 481-482, 489-490, 502-503, 508; letter mentioned from P.M. Gen., 500; letters mentioned to P.M. Gen., 483, 486, 489, 501. Craig, Jonathan, s. petition, 640. Craig, William, s. petition, 640. Craigie (Crege), Andrew, 467; rels. to Scioto speculation, 469-470. Crane, see Tar-he. Crary, Col. Archibald, 137. Crawford, John, s. petition, 640. Creek Indians, 360; rels. wiih U.S., 225, 228, 301, 314, 365. Creilly (Crely), J. Baptiste, Kas. census, 257; land claim, 256; s. peti- tion, 282. Creilly (Cuire), Joseph, s. petition, 281. Crighton, Robert, land claim, 276. Crimes, discussed, 57, 161-162, 176. Croudson, Adam, s. petition, 640. Crow, Captain, see Ame-na-he-han. Cudin, see Godin. Cuillerier dit Barrois, Jean Baptiste (Jean Beau Bien), witness treaty, 534. Cuire, see Creilly. Cul du Sac, 264. Cumberland River, 8, 134. Curry, James, Kas. census, 258. Cutler, Manasseh, 70, 77, 466, 467, 468; letter to Bd. Treas., 61-63; rels. to Ohio and Scioto land cos., 77, 80, 85-88, 110, 417-420. Cut-the-we-ka-saw (Black Hoof),Shaw. chief, s. treaty, 531. Cuyahoga River, 32, 230, 526; bound. Indian lands, 175, Jefferson Co., 617, Wayne Co., 567; dist. from Beaver Creek, 158; post suggested, 101. Dagenet, Francoise, widow of Ambroise, lend claim, 287. Daigneau, Pierre, land claim, 286. Dalton, Valentine Thomas, witness deposition, 291. Dancing Feather, see Oncahye. Dandridge, Bartholomew, letter from Sec. War, 507.
Page 667
INDEX 667 Dane, Nathan, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 28, 29, 35, 54, 76, 98, 105, 112, 116, 135, 146, 156. Danis, Charles, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 255. Danis (Dani), Jerome, Kas. census, 257; s. petition, 282. Danis, Michel, Kas. census, 257; land claim, 254; s. petition, 282. Danville (Ky.), postal station, 484, 489. Danys, Antoine, land claim, 286. Danys, Honnorez, land claim, 286. Daperon, Veronique, widow of Gilliome, land claim, 287. Darke, Col. William, 384, 397; letters mentioned to Pres., 376, 384. Daset, see Dazet. Datasay, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Daugh-Shut-tay-ah, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 531. Daveri, P., s. petition, 425. Davidson, William, s. petition, 640. Davis, Samuel, s. petition, 640. Davison, Absalom, s. petition, 640. Davison, David, witness agree., 614. Davous, —, s. petition, 424. Dayton, no. inhabs., 649. . Dayton, Jonathan, 390, 557, 628, 631; agent for Symmes, 490, 491, 492, 493, 496; letters mentioned to Pres., 414; letters to Pres., 415, Sec. Treas., 488; memorial mentioned, 391. Dazet (Daset), .—, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 424. De Boisbriant, —, command. Sulpi- cian missionaries, 93. Debonceur, —, land claim, 266. De Butts, Henry, witness treaty, 533. Decker, Dinah, widow, s. petition, 636. Decker, Joseph, s. petition, 621. Decker, Luke, s. address to Sargent, 292. Decker, Moses, s. petition, 621, 636, Vin. address, 65. Decker, Tobias, s. petition, 621. De Cochy, Gabriel, s. petition, 278. Deeds, forms of, 15-16; law for record. discussed, 171. De Elaureier, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. De Elaureier, Louis, land claim, 286. Deerfield (Hamilton Co.), no. inhabs., 649. Defense, frontier, discussed, 100-102; problem of organizing, 33-35. De Gagnier (Degaiez), Jacques (Jac- que), s. petitions, 278, 281. De Gagnier (Des Gaiez, Gaie), Jean Baptiste, s. petition, 278. De Gagnier (des Gaiez), Pierre (Pier), s. petitions, 278, 281. De Gagnier (Gagne), widow, land claim, 257. Degoville, —, Gal. prop., 505. D'Habercourt, Capt. —, 619. Dehai, Jean, s. petition, 250. DeHebecourt, Francis, instrs. to, re estab. post office, Gal., 485, 596; letters from P.M.Gen., 485, 539-540 549-550, 596-597, 610; letters men- tioned to P.M.Gen., 539, 549, 610; pay. to, 653; P.M. at Gal., 539, 595; representation re mail service, 541, 542; s. affidavit, 600; s. petition, 425. Delaware Indians, 64, 219, 220, 364, 365, 446, 547, 609; bound., 230-231, 444-445; compensation, 529; murder of, 102-103; rels. to other Indians, 362, 363; rels. with U.S., 140-141, 157, 165, 174, 224, 360; treaties, 174- 181, 525-535. De La Panse River, Indian bound., 231, 444. Deline, see Edeline. Delisle, Amable, land claim, 286. Delisle dit Bienvenu (Bienvenus), An- toine, sr., Kas. census, 258. Delisle, Charles, land claim, 286. D61oge, Joseph, Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. De Louviere, see Louviere. Delpeau, Charles, accused of violating neutrality, 461. Demir, —, s. petition, 425. Demler, George, witness treaty, 533. Dempsy (Demsy, Dimpsy), John, land claim, 274. Dennis, Alexander, land claim, as atty., 274, 276. Denny, Ens. Ebenezer, recommend, to Pres., 309 witness treaties, 179, 184. Denorgon, Marian, widow of Louis, land claim, 287. Denorgon, Marie, widow of Toussaint, land claim, 287. Denye, Jacque, land claim, 286. Departments, Heads of, letter to Pres., 440-441; opinions re Indian pol. sub- mitted to Pres., 440-441. Derause, Francois, land claim, 286. Derogier, Bonnaventure, land claim, 286. De St. Vincens, —, Fr. command., Vin., 546. Des Hayes (Deshays), Jean Baptiste, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 267, 268, 271, 272, 273. Designe, James Theullere, land claim, 257. Desloges (Deloge, Des Logis), Joseph Poirier dil, land claim, 266, 267, 268, 271, 272; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Deslongchamp (de Longchamp, Des long Champs), Louis, land claim, 269, 270, 271; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Des Noyers, .—, Gal. prop., 506; s. pe- tition, 424. Desursins, early Fr. commissary in 111., 93. Detroit, 100, 168, 312 , 459, 528, 569, 623, 632; attitude of Brit, residents, 538; dist. to Cincinnati, 578, 620;
Page 668
668 INDEX estab. civil govt, by U.S., 560, 565- 566, 573-575; Indian affs., 126, 127- 128, 141, 142, 308-309, 527; land re- served for U.S.govt., 178, 527; land titles, 629; method of sending letters to, 620; occupation by U.S., 561, 564, 565, 567, 597; pol. situation, 623-624; traders at, 301. See also Wayne County. Detro1t River, 527; Brit. fort on, 577. De Vacht, W., s. affidavit, 600, peti- tion, 425. Devignais (Devegnes, Devegnet), Jacques, Kas. census, 257; s. peti- tion, 281. De Ville, Le Moyne, s. petition, 425. Dickens, Asbury, 393. Dickson, James, s. petition, 640. Dielle, Charles, land claim, 286. Dimpsy, see Dempsy. Dion, —, Cah. census, 259. Diort, —, s. petition, 425. Ditard, Nicolaus, land claim, 286. Dogs Round the Fire, see Cageaga. Domingue (Dosmainge), Antoine, s. petition, 279. Donation lands, 590, 630; at Vin., 619, 620; opinion Atty. Gen. mentioned, 479; status in 111., 324, 329, 341-342, 545-547. See also Lands. Dorchester, Lord, 166; letter mentioned from McHenry, 561. Dorion (Dorcon), Jean Marie, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 267, 273. Dort, —., Gal. prop., 505. Dosmainge, see Domingue. Doueyenteat, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Doughty, Maj. John, 165, 294, 306; exped. to Muscle Shoals, 226, 231- 233, 364. Dove, William, land claim, 274. Doza, Joseph, Kas. census, 258. Droge, see Troge. Drouette, Antoine, land claim, 286. Drouilly, —, s. petition, 424. Droze, J., s. petition, 424. Duane, James, del. in Cong., 3, 4, 5. Dubois, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Dubois, Piere, land claim, 266. Dubois, —, Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 424. Dubuque (Dubuyu, Dubuyus), Jean Baptiste, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 265, 267, 269; s. petitions, 242, 281. Due, A. B., s. affidavit, 600; s. petition, 424. Ducharme, Charle, Cah. census, 259; s. petition, 242. Ducharme, Joseph, land claim, 286. Ducharme, —, s. petition, 281. Duchesne, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Duclos, —, s. petition, 425. Dudevoir, Charles, land claim, 286. Duduit, —, Gal. prop., 506. Duer, William, sec. to Bd. Treas., 24, 30, 156, 466, 467, 468; connection with Sciota co. pur., 52,417-420, 451, 466-469, 469-470; note, 30. Dugan, —, mail carrier, 489. Dumay, Agate, land claim, 287. Dumoulin, John, 374; s. petition, 281. Duncan, —, negro servant of, killed by Indians, 126; suspects Chippewas of murders, 136. Dunham, Aaron, member N.J. Land co., 129. Dunlap, James, s. petition, 640. Dunlap's Station, no. settlers, 470. Dunmore, Lord, land pur. from In- dians, 546. Dunn, Abner M., P.M., Cincinnati, 536. Dupin, Mike, s. petition, 424. Du Port, .—, s. petition, 424. Du Quette, —, storekeeper, Michil., 516. Durebois (Durbois), Pierre (Piere), Cah. census, 259; land claim, 269. Duthee, Freres, Gal. prop., 506. d'Yrujo, Chevalier, 642. Eagle Creek (Elk River), 612. Eagle Lake, in 111., 275. Eaton, John, 634. Edeline (Deline), Louis, Vin. magis- trate, 283, 292; land claim, 286. Edgar, John, commands militia, Ran- dolph Co., 626, 627; Kas. census, 258; land claim, 254; letters men- tioned to Pasteur, 627, Sargent, 626; s. petition, 590. Edgar, William, member N.J. Land co., 129. Education, 47; land reserved, 53, 62, 70, 81, 83, 113, 149-150, 496, 498. Eel River (L'Anguille), 363. Eel River Indians, compensation, 529; negots. with Hamtramck, 380-381; s. agree., 375; treaty, 525-535. Elk River (Eagle Creek), bound. Adams Co., 612. Ellicott, Joseph, recommend. for surv. gen., 561. Elliot, Col. Matthew, Brit, agent, in- fluence, 301, 563. Ellsworth, Sen. Oliver, attitude towards petition, 462. Emigrants, regulations re privileges in La., 214-215. Engel (Engal), Philip (Philipe), land claim, 263, 266, 270; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 242, 281. England, Col. Richard G., Brit. com- mand. Detroit, 538. Enquaine, —, s. petition, 424. Ernest, Lt. Matthew, 222. Erie purchase, 5. Escheat, estates, only to U.S., 514. Etienne, C, Gal. prop., 505; s. affi- davit, 600.
Page 669
INDEX 669 Ettwein, John, letters mentioned to St. Clair, 102, Thomson, 102; memorial to Cong. 147-148; note, 102. Europe, 468; agents Scioto co. in, 418, 466. Ewing, Dr. —, 562. Fairfield (Hamilton Co.), no. inhabs., 649. Fallenash, Charles, s. petition, 640. Falling Mountain, see Sohaeas. Falls of Muskinghum, place of Indian treaty, 89. Fearing, Paul, note, 133; s. message to St. Clair, 133. Fees, for letters patent to Va. troops, 298. Ferard, P., s. petition, 424. Ferit, —, widow, land claim, 272. Ferrare, Freres, Gal. props., 505. Fichon, Lewis P. A., acct. of, 599, 601; s. petition, 598. Fiece, Eloy, s. petition, 424. Findley, William, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 425, 436. Finley (Finlay), Maj. John, P.M. at Wheeling, 489. Fish Carr1er, chief Cayuga Indians, speech mentioned, 410. Fisher, John, witness Va. cession, 12. Fitzsimmons, Thomas, Cong. com. of investig., 398. Five Nations Indians, 51. See also Six Nations. Flamelin, Joseph, land claim, 286. Flannigin, Samuel G., s. petition, 640. Flanny, James, s. petition, 640. Flint, Royal, 109, 140, 334, 417, 451; contract discussed, 110-111; me- morial, 138-139; note, 74; rept. on proposals, 77, 129-130. See also Parker, Joseph. Floyd, William, del. in Cong., 3, 4, 5. Forget, Father, missionary 1n 111., sale of property, 201. Fort de Chartres, 112, 272, 325; grants recommended to inhabs., 114; plat transmitted to Sec. State, 326. Fort Defiance, 526, 528; Indian ces- sion, 527. Fort Finney, treaty mentioned, 142, 231. Fort Hamilton, Indian attack near, 486; utility discussed, 411. Fort Harmar, 209, 222, 302, 323, 365; Maj. Doughty to command garrison, 306; negots. with Indians, 125-127; treaties, 174-186, 219-220, 230-231. Fort Jefferson, utility discussed, 411. Fort Knox, 627; Indian negots., 374- 375; post, 571. See also Vincennes. Fort Lawrence (Laurence, Laurens), 175, 230, 444, 526, 568, 606, 615, 623. Fort Mcintosh, treaty discussed, 79, 103-104, 174, 177-178, 230-231; troops at, 32, 33, 51. Fort Massac, 571; dist. from Kas., 326; port of entry, 516; reserved in treaty, 528; troops at, 487, 627. Fort Mia mis, 563; order mentioned for Brit, evacuation, 561. Fort Pitt, 26, 89, 125, 136, 143, 438; communications from, 153; goods for treaty sent to, 99; strategic location, 32; troops at, 33, 51. See also Pittsburgh. Fort Recovery, 526, 623, 644; station Indian bound., 605, 606. Fort St. Clair, utility discussed, 411. Fort St. Louis, withdrawal of Sp., 642. Fort Stanwix, treaty unsatisfactory to Indians, 103-104. Fort Steuben (Jeffersonville), letter from, 283; no. settlers, 470. Fort Washington, 308, 312, 314, 337, 347, 380, 382, 385, 454, 470, 482; dist. to Phila., 551; disturbances, 400-401, 402-404; letters mentioned from, 537; postal service, 484, 486, 489, 504; reserv. at, 491, 492, 493, 494, 497; state of supplies, 487; troops at, 306. See also Cincinnati; Hamilton County. Fort Wayne, 526, 528, 568; carrying place, 570; Indian cession, 527. Forts, note, 411; proposed chain, 32. Foster, Dwight, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 481. Fowler, —, rels. to Scioto speculation, 469-470. France, 197, 611; alleged activities of agents, 630; guarantees to former subjects, 40, 324; land grants by crown, 58, 93, 107-108; land pur. in, from Scioto co., 464; law of, in West, 205. See also French, The. Francheville, widow, Cah. census, 259. Francis, Wea chief, s. treaty, 532. Frankfort (Ky.), dist. to Limestone, 551 Franklin (Hamilton Co.), no. inhabs., 649. Franklin, State of, disperses Cherokee, 151. Fredrick (Fredric), Sebastian, s. peti- tions, 621, 636. Fredrick (Fredric), Mary, widow, s. petitions, 621, 636. Fredrick, Louis, s. petitions, 621, 636. Fredrick, Peter, s. petition, 636. Freeman, Abraham, note, 478; petition mentioned, 478. Freeman, Dr. Clarkson, 478; pardon denied, 479. Freeman, Samuel, printer, candidate for P.M., Cincinnati, 560; note, 560. Freeman's Station, no. settlers, 470. Frelinhuysen, Frederick, member N.J. Land co., 129. French, The, alleged intrigues, 619; explan. memorial, 92-94; guarantees to, 7-8, 73; land improvements
Page 670
670 INDEX reserv., 139-140, 144-145; land prob- lems, 66, 107-108, 112-115, 146-147, 231, 337. See also France. French Creek, 32. French River, trade route, 571. Fox River, trade route, 571. Full Moon, see Sonachshowa. Furman, Moore, member N.J. Land co., 129. Fur trade, illicit commerce in 111., 330-334; value, 517. Gagn6, Raphael, land claim, 264. Gallatin, Albert, memorandum men- tioned, 392. Gallionois, Alexis Astruse, land claim, 286. Gallipolis, 489, 508, 612; address men- tioned to St. Clair, 337; contract discussed, 450-451; dist. to Bel Pr6, 489; emig. of Fr. settlers to, 337, 423- 424, 427-428; land situation dis- cussed, 469-470; letter from St. Clair, 311-312; letters mentioned from in- habs., 417, St. Clair, 337; list props., 505-506; observations on petition, 436,464-465, 637; petitions, 422-428, 598-601; postal service, 483, 485, 486, 503, 504, 541, 542, 603, 604, 608, 610; proposals of Sp. govt, to, 465; protec- tion authorized, 407; rept. of com. on petition, 435-436; situation of set- tlers, 442-443, 462-463, 466-470. Gamelin, Antoine, letter from Sargent, 292-293; letter to Sargent, 291-292; mission to Miami and Wab. Indians, 300, 308, 362-363, 367; land claim, 286; note, 291; s. deposition, 291, s. petition, 60. Gamelin, Paul, judge, carries message to Wab. Indians, 308; land claim, 286; s. deposition, 291; s. testimonial to Sargent, 292. Gamelin, Pierre, land claim, 286; s. petition, 60; s. testimonial to Sar- gent, 292; Vin. judge, 282, 283. Gansevoort, Leonard, Cong. com. on army lands, 98. Gerard, —, s. petition, 424.' Gardoqui, Gov. Diego de, (La.), grants land to Geo. Morgan, 169. Garretson (Garetson, Garrison), James, 268; land claim of heirs, 276; s. peti- tion, 253. Garsien (Garsin), Piere, land claim, 270. Gatient (Git), Pierre, s. petition, 282. Gaud (Gault), Louis, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 265, 267, 269, 270, 273. Gaurguipis, Amable, land claim, 286. Gayoso de Lemos, Gov. Manuel (La.), action mentioned, 631; letters men- tioned to St. Clair, 548; orders Am. cargo seized, 288; procl. mentioned, 334; receives order to evacuate Natchez, 642. Gee-que, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Gendron, Jean Baptiste, Kas. census, 258; s. petition, 281. Georgia, 57, 360. Georgetown (Md.), 450. Geographer of U.S., 63, 111; authorized to mark bounds., 81, 123; duties, 12-14; instrs. to: appoint survrs., 135, make plats for Bd. Treas., 55, s. passes, 57; surveys: bounty lands, 76, lands for Cutler and Sargent, 135; lands of Christian Indians, 147-148, 154-155; rept. mentioned, 96; to direct surveys, 96. See also Hutch- ins, Thomas. Gerardin, see Girardin. Germain (Germin), Charles (Charle), land claim, 264, 267, 268; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 250, 281. Germain (Germin), Louis, Kas. census, 258. Gerome (Gerorome), Francois, land claim, 266, 268; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. Gervais (Gervas), J., 604, 608; Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 425; s. state- ment, 506. Gervais, Nicholas, land claim, 264. Gervais, Philipe, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 266, 268; s. petition, 281. Gevote, Wyan. warrior, story Big Bot- tom massacre, 338. Gibault, Father Pierre, land grant, 341; petition for land, 243-244; petition mentioned, 335-336; petition to St. Clair, 243-244; resident priest in 111., 201; s. petition, 281. Gibbs, Joel, member N.J. Land co., 129. Gibson, John, witness treaties, 179, 184. Gidou, —, s. petition, 425. Gilbert, Pierre, land claim, 286. Gilfillin, Adam, s. petition, 640. Gill, Charles, land claim, 268, 271, 276; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 250, 282. Gilman, Benjamin Ives, pay. to, 647. Gilman, Joseph, 467; appd. ter. judge, 584-585; to visit Detroit, 623. Ginat, —, s. petition, 424. Girardin (Gerardin), Antoine, 374; land claim, 263, 264, 266, 268, 270; note, 327; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 242, 281; surveyor for St. Clair, 263-276; to survey Cah. claims, 327. Girardin (Gerardin), Augustin, land claim, 263, 268, 269; Pr. du Pont census, 261; s. petitions, 250, 282. Girardin, widow of Michel, land claim, 265; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Girty, Simon, Brit, interpreter, dis- m1ssed, 538. Girty's Town, Indian cession, 527. Git, see Gatient.
Page 671
INDEX 671 Glass, John, heirs of, s. petitions, 621, 636. Gnadenhutten, 63, 147, 154, 592, 615; land reservation, 18, 86; surveys, 162, 614. See also Christian Indians; Moravians; United Brethren. Gob-mo-a-tick, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 532. Goder, Tousaint, land claim, 286. Godere, Renez dit Pannah, land claim, 287. Godin (Gaudin) dit Touranjeau, Pierre (Piere), land claim, 267, 269; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Godin dit Touranjeau, widow, Kas. census, 257. Godin (Cudin), —, land claim, 265. Goforth, William, comm. as judge changed, 456. Golding, Henry, 111. land owner, 274. Gondron, John Baptiste, land claim, 254. Gossiaux (Gopieux), Jacques, Kas. census, 258. Goudy, Thomas, dep. ter. sec., 559. Graham, George, 550; letters men- tioned to P.M. Gen., 539, 540. Graham, John, letter mentioned, 604. Graham's Station (Preston), postal service, 536, 539, 541, 542. See also Preston. Grand Glaize King, see Teta-boksh-ke. Grandjean, —, s. petition, 424. Grand Portage, 570; loc. and owner discussed, 577; route to, 577. Grand (Ottawa) River, trade route, 571. Grand Ruisseau, in 111., 274, 276. Grav6, —, Superior, seminary Foreign Missions, letter to Cah., 199-202. Graves, John, s. petition, 640. Graves, Lewis, s. petition, 640. Grayson, William, letter to Madison, 71-72. Great Britain, 360; acts of agent in Ky., 166-167; guarantees to former subjects, 40; interest in West, 209; interest with U.S. Indians, 580; land grants in 111. confirm., 324; land grants mentioned, 107-108; pol. and rels. with Indians and U.S., 90, 119, 157, 159, 231, 301, 508, 516-519; question of treaty with, 539; rels. with Wab. Indians, 380-381; rights of trade under Jay treaty, 570; rule in West, 205; treaty 1783 mentioned, 528, 531. Great Hockhocking River, 293. Great Kanawha River, 53. Great Miami (Omie, Big Miami) River, 30, 49, 230, 352, 388, 389, 526, 554, 592; bound. Symmes' pur., 71, 490, 492, 493, 494, 495; Indian bound., 175; Indian treaty, 360; intrusions on lands near, 587; surveys to be made near, 644. Green River, 8, 134. Greene (Green), Charles, failure to execute mail contract, 594-597, 603-604, 608; letters mentioned to P.M. Gen., 595-596, 603, 608; mail contracts discussed, 586, 594-595, 595-596; pay. to, 647; transmits facts re postal service, 610. Greenville (Greeneville), 507, 531, 537, 605; treaty, 525-535. See also In- dian treaties. Griffin, Cyrus, see President of Conti- nental Congress. Griffin, —, 222. Grimare, Gennevieve, widow of Pierre, land claim, 287. Grosl6 (Grole), Louis, see Beguier. Grout, widow of Jacob, land claim, 274, 276. Guay, Charles, land claim, 268. Guerier, —, s. petition, 425. Guerin, —, s. petition, 425. Guielle, Charles, land claim, 286. Guion, Capt. Isaac, 642. Guise, David, land claim, 275; s. peti- tion, 253. Guitar, Pierre, see Guyon. Guitare, Jean, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Guitare, Piere, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Guitas, Pierre, s. petition, 250. Guyon dit Guitar (Guitarier), Piere, land claim, 266, 267; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Gyantwaia (Cornplanter), Seneca chief, in Ft. Harmar negots., 156-157, 164; mission to Miami Indians, 364-365, 367; s. treaty, 184. Gyasota (Big Cross), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Habeas Corpus, writ discussed, 46, 402. Habersham, Joseph, P.M. Gen., 541, 542, 550, 586, 595, 604, 608, 610, 652; note, 536. See also Postmaster Gen. Hah-goo-see-kaw (Captain Reed), Shaw, chief, s. treaty, 533. Half King, effect of death, 131. Half Kings son, see Ha-ro-en-you. Half Town, see Achiout. Hall, John, recommended for survr. gen., 561. Hallary, Badiste, s. petition, 250. Hamelin (Amelin), Laurent (Lorain, Loran), land claim, 264; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 250, 282. Hamilton, Alexander, Sec. Treas., 441, 459, 481, 488, 495; letter mentioned to Ludlow, 391; petiton of Sargent re- ferred to, 406-407. See also Secre- tary of the Treasury. Hamilton, Daniel, s. petition, 640. Hamilton, —, merchant, alleged Sp. agent, 597. Hamilton County, 568, 578, 607, 622; address of Pres. to, 650-651; bills of indict, against Sargent, 574; charac- ter people, 432; comma, of judges
Page 672
672 INDEX changed, 456; disputes between offi- cials, 402-406; division, 612; no. inhabs., 648-649. See also Cincin- nati. Hammond, George, Brit. minister, letter from Sec. State, 518-519. Hamtramck, Maj. John Francis, 284 285, 292, 293, 300, 308, 309, 313, 507; concludes agree. with Indians, 374- 375; instrd. to send agents among Indians, 380; letters mentioned from St. Clair, 335, to Harmar, 170, Sar- gent, 405; letter from St. Marie, 288- 290; letter to Sec. War, 380-383. Harbin, Elizabeth, widow, s. petition, 621. Hardouin (Ardoin, Artoin), Etienne (Etiene), land claim, 269, 271; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 250, 281. Hardy, J., s. Ohio co. indenture, 84. Hardy, Samuel, del. in Cong., 6, 9. Harmand (Harmard, Harmonie) dit Sansfacon, Antoine, 263; Cah. census, 259; land claim, 263, 270, 272; s. petition, 242. Harmar, Brig. Gen. Josiah, 121, 125, 126, 137, 158, 222, 224, 226, 287, 336, 471; address of Americans at Vin. to, 65-66; command, at Vin., 65-68; exped. against Indians, 309, 313, 364, 367; letter from Kas., 67-68; letters mentioned to Sec. War, 26, 64, 170; note, 310; opinion of Pres. re, 310; rept. re move. of people down the Ohio, 196; to treat with Wab. In- dians, 50; witness treaties, 179, 184. Harnes, Lenard, s. petition, 253. Ha-ro-en-you (Half Kings son), Wyan. chief, 141; s. treaty, 532. Harper, —, 650. Harpin, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Harris, —, P.M., Washington, Ky. 542. Harrison, Capt. William Henry, 400; altercation with Blanchard and Smith, 400, 402, 403; appd. ter. sec., 648; witness treaty, 533. Harrison County (Va.), 613. Hartshorn, Ens. A., witness treaties, 179, 184. Haselden, Capt. R. B., letter to editor, 378. Haw-kin-pum-is-ka, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532. Hawkins, Benjamin, 35; explan. and crit. of Indian pol., 366-369; letters to Pres., 366-369, 428,439; note, 366; opinions re: maintenance mil. force in ter., 368-369, plans for peace with Indians, 367-368; recommends J. Steele as Indian commr., 439. Heath, George, s. petition, 640. Heath (Heth), John, represent. in Cong., 481. Hebert, —, s. petition, 425. Heckewelder, John, 162, 180; charac- terized, 446; estimates pop., 470; joins Putnam in survey Morav. lands, 615; note, 162; services at Wab. treaty, 413; recommended to attend Indian confer., 446. Henderson, James, s. petition, 253. Hendricks (Hendrex), George, land claim, 275; s. petition, 253. Hendricks, Capt., mission to west. Indians, 365, 409. Hennery, Daniel, land claim, 276. Henry, Ann, widow, land claim, 287. Henson (Hanson), widow, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Herrod, Thomas, s. petition, 640. Heysham, Robert, witness Conn. ces- sion, 658. Hickonquash (Tearing asunder), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Hillegas, —, treasurer, receipt men- tioned, 390. Hillhouse, Sen. James, s. Conn. ces- sion, 658. Hineson, Col., slaves to be transported, 231-232. Hin-go-swash, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Hinton, Elizabeth, widow, s. petitions, 621, 636. Hobbs, Ephraim, s. petition, 640. Hockhocking River, 30, 551; lands near taken by intruders, 339. Hodgson, Col. Samuel, Dep. Q.M. Gen., 399, 489; delivers Indian goods, 405; instrs. mentioned to, 377; services as Q.M. Gen., 400. Holeday, James, s. address, 65. Holland, 466, 468. Holliday James, heirs, s. petitions, 621 636. Holten, Samuel, del. Cong., 10, 11, 12. Horse-stealing, punishment for, 176. Hoshor, George, s. petition, 640. Hough, Christopher, s. petition, 636. Howard, Col. Don Carlos, Sp. com- mand., St. Louis, 631; note, 642. Howell, Joseph, 475. Hudson River, 10, 20, 438. Huff, Machal, s. petition, 253. Hughston, Henry, s. petition, 640. Hull, Nathaniel, land claim, 274, s. petition, 253. Hunot, Joseph, sr., land claim, 286. Huron River, traders on, 570. Hurtause, —-, s. petition, 425. Hutchins, Thomas, geographer of U.S., 147, 148, 159, 344; Indian bound, on map by, 445; note, 30; letter to Sargent, 162; proposal for surveys, 30. See also Geographer of U.S. Illinois (Illinois Country), 39, 99-100, 243, 261, 262, 324, 413; commerce, 330-334; donation lands, 69, 107, 112-115, 329, 340-342, 590; emigra- tion, 330; Indian situation, 406;
Page 673
INDEX 673 manumission of slaves, 149; petitions and memorials, 68-70, 72-73, 92-94, 241-242, 252-253, 279-283, 590; poverty, 245-246; relig. and educ., 149-150, 199-202; repts. on, 105-109, 315-317, 323-337, 542-549; state of land titles reviewed, 544-545. Illinois Indians, grant land to Ill.-Wab. Land co., 115; status, 445. Illinois Lake, 527. Illinois River, 78, 140, 528; bound. line of grants, 75, 114; description, 326; Indian cession, 527; Indians on, 380; trade route, 331, 571. Illinois and Wabash Land Company, 428; memorials, 353-354, 387-388; rept. on, 115-117. Import duties, plan discussed for collec- tion, 569-572, 584. Indian boundary line, 437, 605, 609; described in treaties, 175, 230-231, 526; policy re, 131, 178, 361, 628; rept. of Sec. State re, 444-445; sur- vey, 625-626, 644, 647. Indian Commissioners, 318; instrs. mentioned, 436, 437; letter to Pres., 455-456. Indian Ordinance, discussed, 247-248, 333; text, 19-22. Indian trade, 58, 75, 138, 193, 570; absence of laws to forbid foreigners to engage in, 381; center, 576-577; freedom, 530; illegal, 515-516; li- censes, 79, 176-177; regulations, 20-22, 382, 530; state of, 381. Indian Treaties, Ft. Finney (Mouth of the Miami), mentioned, 142, 231; Ft. Harmar (Muskinghum), men- tioned, 361, 362, 367, 389, 471, 491, 494, texts, 174-181, 182-186; Ft. Mc- intosh, mentioned, 174, 230-231, 360, 361, 445; Ft. Stanwix, mentioned, 360, 361, 435; Greenv., mentioned, 537, 547, 570, 651, text, 525-535; Hopewell, mentioned, 360; Painted Post, mentioned, 365; Wab. treaty, see Wabash Indians. Indians, 47, 199, 406, 436, 475, 476, 509, 520, 538, 539, 603; administra- tion, 19-22, 51, 138, 189-190, 194- 195, 247-248, 336, 404-405, 514, 629; attitude towards U.S., 192-193, 563; causes of discontent, 31, 60, 89, 103-104, 119-120, 359-369, 410-412, 543; cessions to U.S., 175, 183, 526-528; claims to lands, 360-361; compensation to, 90, 529; Detroit council, 127-128,157-158; hostilities, 31-35, 68, 69, 126, 158, 159, 160, 170, 216, 227-228, 245, 294, 301, 307, 361, 363, 364, 459, 464, 471, 480, 486, 621, 635, 656; land cessions to, 528; land titles of, 75, 115; liquor sale to, 137-138; mil. pol. towards, 32-35, 158-159, 287, 308-309, 355: negots., 78-79, 89-91, 119-121, 160-161, 164-166, 191 193, 197, 359-365, 126850—34—vol. 2 44 374-375, 408, 430, 435, 437, 438-439, 447-449, 452, 507, 537-539; policies towards, 20-22, 57-58, 99, 102-105, 117, 166, 168, 176-177, 193-195, 228, 244-245, 299, 300-301, 313-314, 335, 351, 359-369, 440-441, 452-455, 519, 527-528, 530-531; rels. between tribes, 126, 127-128, 141-142, 157- 158, 160, 168; rels. of southern, to U.S., 225; rels. with Gr. Brit., 168, 380, 382; repts. on, 31-35, 100- 102, 103-105, 359-369; reservations, 18; state of affairs discussed, 380-383, 410-412; to serve survr. gen., 592; treaties (texts and discussion), 33-34, 50-51, 77, 89-91, 104, 117-118, 163-164, 170, 174-186, 191-193, 197-198, 225, 228, 359-362, 365, 374-375, 413, 414, 435, 525-535. See also Superintendents of Indian affairs; names of individual tribes. Irvine, William, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 61, 77, 95, 105, 108, 111, 116; letter mentioned to Sec. War, 119. Isle de bois blanc, fort on, 577; Indian cession, 527. Jack, John, s. petition, 253. Jackson, George, 613. Jackson, John G., 645; arts. of agree, as survr., 613-614, 616; to survey U.S. mil. lands, 607, 615. Jackson, Maj. William, sec. to Wash- ington, 300; letter from Lear, 199; letters to Sec. State, 342, Turner, 226-227; note, 199. Jacques, Etienne, land claim, 286. Jamison, Charles, s. petition, 640. Jamison, Joseph, s. petition, 640. Jamison, William, s. petition, 640. Janis, Baptis, s. petitions, 278, 281. Janis, Francois, 374; Kas. census, 257; land claim, 255; s. petition, 281. Janis, Jean Baptiste, land claim, 255. Janis, Nicolas, land claim, 255. Jay, John, see Secretary for Foreign Affairs. Jean, Petit, s. petition, 424. Jefeos, Thomas, s. petition, 253. Jefferson, Thomas, del. in Cong., 6, 9; Sec. State, 241, 315, 322, 350, 351, 352, 353, 369, 371, 379, 401, 412, 416, 439, 440, 441, 445, 449, 452, 458, 460. See also Secretary of State. Jefferson County, bounds., 617; crea- tion, 617-618. Jesuits, status of property, in Kas., 93, 330, 341. Jeune, Duteil, s. petition, 425. Johnson, James, s. addresses, 65, 292; s. petition, 636. Johnson, William Samuel, del. in Cong., 22, 23, 24. Johnston, Edward, land claim, 286. Johnston, James, s. petition, 640; wit- ness deposition, 291.
Page 674
674 INDEX Johnston, Robert, s. petitions, 621, 636. Joitteau, —, s. petition, 425. Jones, David, witness treaty, 534. Jones, John Rice, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 253, 254. Journals of Continental Congress, note re character of, 42. Journay, —, s. petition, 425. Joyale, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Judges, see Territory Northwest of the River Ohio. Judy (Jeudy), Jacob, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 254. Justices of the Peace, appt. in Wayne Co., 568-569. Ka-ba-ma-saw, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Kanassee (New Arrow), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Kanawha (Kanhawa) River, 462. Kaskaskia (Kaskaskias, Kaskias), 92, 114, 222, 254, 255, 256, 257, 323, 368, 445, 516, 544, 627, 642; au- thority of magistrates endangered, 67; census, 257-258; distance from Ft. Massac, 326, to Vin., 634; donation lands, 114, 329, 547; guarantees to settlers, 8, 40; improvements, 140, 145; land claims, 254-257, 578; letter mentioned from, 459; letter to Harmar, 67-68; list of lands claimed by settlers, 253-257; not. pub. appd., 329; order for erecting prison, 277, 334; paper money, 334-335; petitions, 72-73, 92-94; plat of town trans- mitted, 323; postal service, 633-634, 646; registry records IH.-Wab. sale, 353. See also Cahokia; Illinois; St. Clair County. Kaskaskia Creek, 590. Kaskaskia Indians, at treaty of Greenv., 525-535; claims, 547; com- pensation, 539. Kaskaskia River, 112; bound, of tract granted to settlers, 114; description, 326; land claims on, 254, 256; need for post, 571. Ka-tha-wa-sung, Chip, chief, s. treaty, 533. Kay-se-wa-e-se-kah, Shaw, chief, s. treaty, 531. Kean, John, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 35, 78. Kearney, Dyre, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 110, 112. Kee-aw-hah, Indian chief, s. treaty, 532. Kee-no-sha-meek, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 533. Kee-sass (Sun), Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Kekayuga, Indian town, 165. Kelly, John, s. petition, 640. Kemberly, Ephraim, patent described, 585. Kentucky, 34, 167, 210, 211, 414, 471, 551, 603; Brit, agents in, 167, 209; Indian depreds., 33, 159, 361, 363; militia, 51, 301, 306; postal service, 482, 489-490, 539, 595, 604; rels. with Wab. Indians, 216, 224-225; separatist move., 167; settlers from, in ter., 548, 651, 654. Kentucky (Cuttawa), River, 526, 589. Keowee River, 360. Kerns, Benjamin, s. petition, 640. Kesheywa, Sac chief, s. treaty, 179. Khun, see Coon. Kiahtulaho (Snake), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Kiandogewa (Big Tree), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Kickapoo Indians, 157, 375, 413, 547; compensation, 529; dist. to, 158; treaty, 525-535. Kickapooquaigh, s. Wab. agree., 375. Kik-tha-we-nund (Anderson), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532. Kilbuck, land intrusted for use of, 64. Kilgore, George, s. petition, 640. Kilgore, James, s. petition, 640. Kilgore, Thomas, s. petition, 640. Kilgore, William, s. petition, 640. King, Rufus, 10,11, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 28, 29, 46, 54, 76; s. Mass. deed of cession, 12. Kiondushowa (Swimming Fish), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Kirkpatrick, Maj. -—, 508. Kish-ko-pe-kund (Captain Buffaloe), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. Knowles, Capt., —, did not sell liquor to Indians, 137. Knox, Henry, Sec. of War, 26, 27, 28, 35, 64, 91, 98, 102, 105, 118, 121, 127 132,136,137,143, 160, 161, 165,166, 173,197, 219, 220, 221, 226, 308, 310, 321, 366, 367, 370, 371, 383, 384, 407, 408, 410, 412, 414, 430, 433, 436, 441, 446, 450, 453, 454, 455, 464, 476, 487, 505. See also Secretary of War. Knox, William, letters to St. Clair, 143-144, 155, 189. Knox County, 544, 634; gen. court not held, 300; petition from, 620-621; office tenure, 432. See also Vin- cennes. Konatikina, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 179. Kuhn, see Coon. La Baye (La Bayl), 571; trading post, 570. Labecasse (Labasier), Jean Baptiste, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 273; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Labille, —, s. petition, 425. Labonde, Louis, s. petition, 281. Labriere (Labrieu), Raymond Nor- mand, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 254.
Page 675
INDEX 675 Labuissiere, Gennevieve, wife of Joseph, land claim, 287. La Bunier, N., Cah. census, 259. Labuxiere (La Bussiere), Joseph, jr., land claim, 263, 264. Labuxiere (La Buissere), Joseph, sr., land claim, 263, 264, 269; deposition, 261-262; note, 328. Labruxiere (La Buissere), Louis Joseph, land claim, 273. Lacelle (Laselle), Antoine, witness treaty, 534. Lacelle (Laselle), Hyacinthe, witness treaty, 534. Lacelle (Lasselle), Jacques, interp. treaty, 534. La Chaise (La Chase, Lachere), —, accused of violating neutrality, 461; influence among Indians, 413; sup- posed Fr. agent, 619. Lachambre, R., witness treaty, 534. La Chance (La Chanssee), Joseph, land claim, 265, 271, 272. La Chanry, magistrate of Kas., s. petition, 68. La Chanse, Jean Baptiste, Kas. census, 258. Lachapelle (la Chapell), Antoine (An- thony), land claim, 255. Lachapelle, widow of Bazile, Kas. census, 258. La-Chasse, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. La Cloche, trad, post, 570. La Coste (Pierre La), s. petition, 281. Lacource (La Course, Lacouse), An- toine, land claim, 264, 266, 267, 268, 270, 272; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. La Couture, Joseph, land claim, 267, 276; s. petition, 250. La Croix (La Croire, Lacroix), Charles, 272: Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. Lacroix, Jacque, land claim, 286. La Croix, Jean Baptiste, Cah. land claim, 264. Laderoute dit Seguin, see Seguin. Laderoute, Louis, land claim, .286. La Flamme, Bazile, land claim, 273. La Fleur, Paul, land claim, 268. Lafteur, Pierre, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 265, 266, 269, 273; s. petition, 281. Lafforet (Laforest), Robert, j. p., s. affidavit, 600. Lafontaine, Catarine, widow of John Baptiste, land claim, 287. Lafontaine, Francis, witness treaty, 533. Laforest, Pierre, land claim, 286. Laforge, Margaret, wife of Peter Anthony, acct. of, 599, 601; s. peti- tion 598. Laforge, Peter Anthony, 598; Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 425. Lagarde, Maudelin, widow of St. Jean, land claim, 287. Lagesse, Potawa. chief, speech men- tioned, 406. Lagrave, Michel, s. petition, 250. La Guina, trad, post, 570. Lajoye, Pierre, ransoms slave boy from Indians, 237-238, 239-240. Lake Champlain, 584. Lake Erie, 11, 13, 18. 32, 33, 101, 157, 178, 213, 230, 346, 438, 447, 526, 527, 528, 564, 571, 623; bound. Jefferson Co., 617, Wayne Co., 567; Indian bound., 175; Indian situation near, 360; trad, post on, 570. Lake Huron, 527, 568; Brit, post to be erected near, 168; trad. posts on, 570. Lake Michigan, 49, 173, 527, 568, 571; Indians near, 380; rels. of Brit, and Indians, 301, 331. Lake of the Woods, described as ter. bound., 172. Lake Ontario, 4, 11, 438, 584. Lake St. Clair, 527, 568; Brit, build fort, 168. Lake Sandusky, reserv. for trad. post, 177-178. Lake Superior, 571. La Lancete (La Lancett, La Lanzete), Joseph, Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. Lalande (Lalarcede), Alexandre, Kas. census, 258. La Malice, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 533. La Marc, Louis, land claim, 286. Lambert (L'Ambert), Joseph, land claim, 263, 264, 267, 271, 276; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 242, 250, 281. Lambert, —, s. aff1davit, 600; s. peti- tion, 425. Lamotte, Jacque, land claim, 286. Land, 8, 62, 63, 72, 81, 83, 139, 140, 144, 145, 169-170, 340, 341, 349-350, 352, 546, 554, 578, 585; acts and resols. of Cong, re disposal, sale and survey, 12-18, 76, 78, 122-124, 134, 144-146, 149-150, 153-155, 155-156, 172-173, 296-298, 388-389, 389-393, 394-395, 552-557; admin. of survey and sale, 14-18, 25, 162, 211, 213, 285-287, 329, 342-348, 349, 477-478, 544-549, 562-563, 566, 580-584, 628; 632, 641, 643-646, 651,652-654, 656, Bd. Treas. letters and repts. re, 24-25 61, 63-64, 74, 77, 109-111; classif. of claimants, 315-317, 323-329; comm. directing surveys, 213; Cong, com. repts. re grants, sale and sur- veys, 54-56, 105-109, 112-117, 129- 130,135,139-140,149-150; donation, 197, 341-342, 475, 477, 478, 479; extinguish. of Indian title, 79, 103- 105, 117-118, 175-176, 194-195, 231, 313-314, 360-361, 435; guarantees of titles, 40; Hutchins' proposal for survey, 30; intruders, 26-27, 51,177,
Page 676
676 INDEX 338-339, 548-549, 587, 651, 654; Kemberly's patent, 585; letters, memorials and petitions re grants and titles to individuals, 58-61, 66- 67, 68-70, 70-71, 72-73, 92-95, 99- 100,147-148,241-242,243-244,252- 253,279-283, 311-312, 323-329, 422- 428, 442-443, 462-470, 590, 598-601, 620-621, 634-641; letters and pro- posals of land cos. re grants, 52-54, 61-63, 70-71, 74-76, 80-88, 138-139, 156, 332-333, 353-354; list claims in Kas., 253-257; list claims specified for survey in Cah. dist., 263-276; list persons entitled to donation, in Vin., 285-287; repts. of progress of surveys, 414-415, 588-590, 598, 602, 605-607, 609-610, 613-614, 614-616, 624-626, 631-632, 647, 649, 652-654, 656-657; repts. of Sec. War re, 26-28, 95-98, 104; state cessions to U.S., 3-12, 22-24, 657-658; status of titles: in 111., 544-546, 611, in Vin., 472, 544-546, 634-636; Symmes' patent, 490-498. See also Board of Treas- ury; Cahokia; Donation lands; Flint, Royal; Gallipolis; Illinois; Kaskas- kia; letters of Secretary of the Treasury and Rufus Putnam; Mor- gan, George; Ohio company; Parker, Joseph; Scioto company; Seven Ranges; Symmes' purchase; Vin- cennes. Land Ordinance of 1785, 24, 63, 79, 81, 86, 88, 147, 153-154, 497, 581, 583, 592, 617; Bd. Treas. seeks explan. of clause on land payment, 74; lands to be divided and settled in accord. with, 55, 113; Morav. lands to be surveyed, 162; supplement to, 122- 124, mentioned, 147-148; text of, 12-18. Langlois, Gerard, s. petition, 279. Langlois, Renez, land claim, 286 Languedoc, Andrez, land claim, 286. Languedoc, Charles, Land claim, 286. Languedoc, Francois, land claim, 286. Languedoc, Minors of Joseph, land claim, 270. L'Anguille (Eel R.), 363. Lanham, Elias, pay. to, 649. L'Anse a la graise, see Anse. Lapanc6 (Lapence), Jean Pierre Roy dit, land claim, 265, 266, 269, 270, 272; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. peti- tion, 250. Lapanc6 (Lapence), Joseph, Cah. cen- sus, 259; land claim, 265, 270, 272. Lapance (Lapense6), Francois Xavier Roy, Cah. census, 259. La Pense, Forgit, land claim, 267. La Pense, Francois, land claim, 266, 273. Laperche, Pierre, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 265, 266, 273; s. petition, 242. La Pierre, Jean Baptiste, land claim of heirs, 265, 270. La Poussiere, s. Wab. agree., 375. Lardoise, Caterine, widow of Amable, land claim, 287. Laroire, —, s. petition, 425. Laselle, see Lacelle. Lasoude, Louis, s. petition, 278. Lasource, Jean Baptiste, Kas. census, 258. Lasource, Jean Baptiste dit Thaumur (Thomur), Kas. census, 257. Lasselle, see Lacelle. Latrimouille, Jacque, land claim, 286. Laurent, —, s. petition, 425. Laws, Territorial, see Territory North- west of the River Ohio. Lear, Tobias, 218; letters mentioned to Pres., 450, Turner, 218; letters to Atty. Gen., 318, 351, Dayton, 414-415, 416, W. Jackson, 199, Sec. State, 317, 350, 430, 442, Turner, 217; note, 199; transmits ter. jour. and laws to Sec. State, 442. Leather Lips, see Sha-tey-ya-ron-yah. Le Blanc, see Thaw-me. Le Boeuf, one of proposed posts, 32. Leboeuf (Le Bauf), Basil, land claim, 271. Lebrun (Le Breun), Louis, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 265, 268, 271, 272; s. petitions, 250, 281. Le Claire, —, Gal. prop., 506. Le Clerc, Pierre, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 425. Leclerc, S., s. petition, 425. Le Clerce, S., s. petition, 425. Le Comte, Louis, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 267, 270, 271, 272, 273. Leduc, C, s. petition, 424. Leduc, M.P., s. petition, 424. Leduc, —, Gal. prop., 505. Le Due, .—, s. petition, 425. Lee, Arthur, del. in Cong., 6, 9, 77; commr. at Ft. Mcintosh treaty, 174; member Bd. Treas., 24, 80, 85, 490, 492, 494, 495, 496; s. rept. and letters, 74, 109, 111, 125. Lee, Charles, Atty. Gen., 558; rept. mentioned re Symmes, 392. Lee, Gov. Henry (Va.), letter from Sec. War, 453-454; letter mentioned to Sec. War, 453. Lee, Richard Henry, 395, 396; Pres. Cont. Cong., 18; letter mentioned re paper money, 46. Leech, George, s. petitions 621, 636. Le faux chenal, proposed bound. in memorial 111. Fr., 94. Lefevre, Charle, Cah. census, 259. Lefevre, Louisa, widow of Antoine, land claim, 287. Legionville, 452. Legrand, Veronie, widow of Gabriel, land claim, 287.
Page 677
INDEX 677 Legras (Legrace), Col. J.M.P., 283; advice re lands, 620; connection with Am. settlers in Vin., 634; note 60; s. petition, 60. Legrass, Marie Louis, widow of John Phillip Marie, land claim, 287. Le Gris, see Na-goh-quan-gogh. Le-man-tan-quis (Black King), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532. Le May, Louis, rr. du Pont census, 261. Le May, widow, Pr. du Pont census, 260. Lemen, James, s. petition, 253. Lemieux (Le Mieux, Lemieu), Claude (Claudius, Glode), Kas. census, 258; land claim, 254; s. petition, 282. Le Moyne de Ville (Lemoyne), Gal. prop. 506; s. petition, 425. Lenee, Duteis, s. petition, 424. Le Page, Antoin, land claim, 264. Lepage, Leon, Cah. census, 259. Le Page (Lepage), widow of Joseph, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 265, 266, 272. Letailleur, —, for Degoville, Gal. prop., 505. Letters Patent, 298. See also Land. Levasseur (Vade), Louis, s. petition, 282. Levens, -—, heirs of widow, s. petition, 621. Levrond, Joseph, land claim, 286. Lewis, Capt., delivers order for Brit. evacuation Oswego and Niagara, 561. Lewis, Joseph, s. petition, 640. Lewis, Thomas, witness treaty, 533. L'Hommedieu, Ezra, del. in Cong., 4. L'Hudlier, P. Pon, s. petition, 425. License law, St. Clair's opinion, 520. Ligonier (Pa.), 221, 558. Limba, widow of Peter, land claim, 256. Limestone (Maysville, Ky.), 160, 470; dist. to Frankfort and Wheeling, 551; postal service, 482, 484, 485, 486, 489, 504, 508, 586; survey road from Wheeling, 550-552. See also Mays- ville. Lincoln, Benjamin, Indian commr., 450, 455. Lincoln, Joseph, bill of, 656. Liquor, sale to Indians, 137-138. Little Beaver, see A-ma-cun-sa. Little Fox, see A-coo-la-tha. Little Guyandatta, dist. to Bel Pre, 489, Limestone, 489. Little Miami River, 8, 18, 30, 72, 134, 135, 155, 160, 321, 345, 346, 388, 389, 470; bound. Symmes' purchase, 71, 347, 491, 493, 494, 497, Va., mil. lands, 297; dist. from Miami town, 158; Indian bound., 445. Little Thunder, see Ne-me-kass. Little Turtle, see Me-She-kun-nogh- quoh. Little Wabash River, 76, 130; proposed bound. land grants, 75, 113. Livermore, Sen. Samuel (N.H.), 557. Livingston, Walter, member Bd. Treas. 24, 25, 80, 85, 490, 492, 494, 495, 496; letter mentioned to Symmes, 390; s. letters and repts., 74,109, 111, 125. Loaded Man, see Onechsetee. Loan office, 122; duties re land sales, 14-18. Loan office certificates, use of, in land purchases, 55. Lognon, Francois, land claim, 286. Lognon, Joseph, land claim, 286. Long Shanks, see Way-the-ah. Long Tree, see Tekahias. Longval, Joseph, Kas. census, 258. Longval, Joseph Louis, land claim, 255. Longval, Louis, Kas. census, 258. Lonval, Francois, Cah. census, 259. Loramies Creek, 644. Loramies store, 526, 528; Indian ces- sion, 526; station on Indian bound., 605, 606. Lord, Capt. Hugh, authent. deed of sale, 353. Losantville, see Cincinnati. Louchons, Joseph, s. petition, 278. Louisiana, 261,262; distrib. troops, 631; permission to emigrate to, 213-215; procl. by gov., 213-215. Louisville (Ky.), Col. Connolly in, 166; dist. to Vin., 634; postal service, 489, 646. Louvieres, Antoine Duchaufour de, at- titude toward runaway slave, 233- 234. Louviere 6 Cuyers, Antoine de, to address St. Clair, 278, 279. Luc, Maria, wife of Peter, acct. of, 600; s. petition, 598. Lucas, William, s. petition, 640. Ludlow, Israel, 390, 609, 616; clerk of courts, 400; dispute with Blanchard, 403; fin. accts., 631, 647; instrs. as survr., 342-343, 347, 605; letters mentioned to Hamilton, 391, Put- nam, 615, 626, 643, 645, Isaac Wil- liams, 626; letters to Putnam, 609- 610; note, 342; recommended as survr. gen., 561; survr. Indian bound. and mil. lands, 602, 606, 607, 609- 610, 615, 625, 628, 645; survr. Symmes's pur., 415, 498. Luneford, Antony, land claim, 286. Luse, Ens. Franc1s, witness Ft. Harmar treaties, 179, 184. McCarty (Mactique), Maj. Richard, Brit, command., 111., 261-262. McClure, Robert, 649. McClure, —, 503. McCoy, John, s. petition, 640. McCoy, Thomas, s. petition, 640. McCurdy, Capt. William, attacked by Indians, 307; witness treaties, 179, 184. McDonald, Thomas, s. petition, 640.
Page 678
678 INDEX McDougall, Alexander, del. in Cong., agent N.Y. in land cession, 3, 4, 5. McDowell, John G., mail contractor, letter mentioned to P.M. Gen., 541; schedule, 536. McDowell, Samuel, chair. Ky. conv., 225; letter (E.) from Pres., 225. McDowell, —, Dela. Indian officer, 141. McFarland, Samuel, s, petition, 640. McGillivray, Alexander, attitude to- wards U.S., 226. McHenry, James, Sec. War, 561. See also Secretary of War. Ma-chi-we-tah, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 533. Mcintosh, —, merchant, goods seized by Sp. officers, 170. McKee, Alexander, Brit. Indian agent, influence among Indians, 563, 580; information from, 382; to reside in Montreal, 538. McLane, Jeremy, s. petition, 640. McMahan, Robert, s. petition, 640. McMillan, William, j.p., Hamilton Co., 434; comm. changed, 456; note, 305; recommended for ter. judge, 622. Macnabb, Archibald, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 253. Macomb, Alexander, member N.J. Land co., 129. Madison, James, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 28, 29, 54, 76, 148, 156; letter from Grayson, 71-72. Magh-pi-way (Red Feather), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532. Magill, Arthur, s. petition, 640. Magnen, —, s. petition, 424. Magniev, —, s. petition, 424. Maguet (Maquet), Anthony, acct. of, 599, 601; Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 598. Maguet (Maquet) Pierre Robert, 601; s. petition, 424. . Mahl, Frederick, land claim, 286. Mail contracts, discussed, 541-542, 585, 586, 594-597, 633-634, 652; failure of Greene to fulfill, 603-604, 608. See also Postal service. Maillet (Mayet, Mayette), Capt. Jean Baptiste, appd. Indian agent, 412- 413; characterized, 406; complaint, 237-238; note, 333. Maillot (Malliot), Jaquet (Jaque), land claim, 268; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Maldan, —, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 425. Mallet, Francois, land claim, 286. Mallette, Antonie, land claim, 286. Mallette, Joseph, land claim, 286. Mallette, Pierre, land claim, 286. Malliot, see Maillot. Maloher, —, Gal. prop., 506. Mandeville, —, s. petition, 425. Manessier, —, Gal. prop., 506. Mangen, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Mansfield, Lord, opinion mentioned, 41. Mantrel, —, Gal. prop., 505. Manumission, not implied by ord. 1787, 149. Maquet, see Maguet. Marais, —, Gal. prop., 505. Mar-chand, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Marie, Joseph, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264. Marier, Antonie, land claim, 286. Marietta, 221, 338, 371, 457, 461, 485, 622; dist. to Wheeling, 489; postal carriage on river, 503, 508; postal service, 482, 483, 485, 486, 504, 586; St. Clair leaves family at, 222. See also Muskingum River; Ohio Com- pany. Marion, H., s. petition, 425. Marret, C, s. petition, 425. Marret, P., s. petition, 425. Marsh, Daniel, agent for Symmes, 390, 490, 491, 492, 493, 496. Martial law, 402. Martin, John, s. petitions, 621, 636. Martin (Mardin), Pierre, land claim, 265, 267, 268, 272, 273; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. Martin, Simeon, surveyor, 614, 615, 645, 647; delays returns of surveys, 643-644, 652-653, 656; Putnam's orders to, 606, 653. Marure, —, s. petition, 424. Maryland, 562. Mash-i-pi-nash-i-wish (Bad Bird), Chip. chief, s. treaty, 533. Mason, George, 46. Massachusetts, 39, 85; acts gen. court, 10-11; cession west, lands, 10-12; charter limits, 11; comms. of, sug- gested for ter. officials, 91; deed of cession mentioned, 213; rept. of comm. on bound, with N.Y., 111; settlers from, in ter., 206. Ma-sass, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 533. Massissugue, trad. post, 570. Mateldass, trad, post, 570. Mathers, James, witness Conn. ces- sion, 24. Mathews, John, survr., 645; begins sur- veys, 615; contract mentioned, 616; note, 607; to survey U.S. mil. lands, 607. Mathurin, —, accused of violating neutrality, 461. Matrie (Matry), Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 424. Matson, Ralph, s. petitions, 621, 636. Maudoronk, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Maumee (Miami, Miamis of Lake Erie) River, 142, 160, 508, 526, 568; Brit. proposal for fort, 487; free passage on to be allowed, 528; Indian cession, 527; trade route, 570. Maxwell, William, appd. P.M., Cin- cinnati, 536, 560; note, 536.
Page 679
INDEX 679 May, James, 656; appd. j.p., Wayne Co., 568; conveys information re McKee, 580. May, John, note, 133. May, widow, land claim, 269. Mayes, Robert, s. petition, 636. Mayet, Capt. Jean Baptiste, see Maillet. Mayot, Nicolaus, land claim, 286. Maysville (Ky.), postal station, 652. See also Limestone. Mee-ne-doh-gee-sogh, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 532. Mehl, Frederick, s. petition, 636. Meigs (Meggs), Return Jonathan, jr., appd. ter. judge, 642; letter men- tioned to P.M. Gen., 608; note, 308; P.M. at Marietta, 509. Meigs, Return Jonathan, sr., 308, 467. Melcher (Melchor), Lt. Jacob, attacked by Indians, 301, 307. Memorials, from: Cah., 241-242, 249- 251, 111. Fr., 92-94, 279-282, Ettwein, for survey of lands for Christian Indians, 147-148, Flint, for hearing on land pur., 138-139, Gibault, 243-244, Ill.-Wab. Land co., 353- 354, 387-388, Parsons and associ- ates, for land, 29, Parsons and Var- num, submit, claims, 102, Sargent, 318-319. See also Petitions. Menager, see Mesnager. Menery, Hugh, s. petition, 640. Menery (Mennery), James, s. petition, 640. Menery, Richard, s. petition, 640. Mennemerlee, Fe, s. petition, 424. Mercer, Capt. John, commands boat to Ft. Washington, 302. Mercier (Mersie), J. Baptiste (Badiste), Cah. census, 259; land claim, 266, 267, 272, 273; s. petition, 282. Meredith, Samuel, U.S. Treasurer, 594. Meridian line, run between L. Erie and Pa., 213. Merleau, Gabriel, land claim, 267, 269. Mero, see Miro. Mesass, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 179. Me-she-ge-the-nogh, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Me-She-kun-nogh-quoh (Little Turtle), Miami chief, s. treaty, 532. Mesnager (Menager), Claud Romain, Gal. prop., 506. Meteyer, Louis, land claim, 286. Meutely, —, s. petition, 424. Miami (Hamilton Co.), number of settlers, 649. Miami Indians, 165, 195, 231, 368, 380, 382, 547; attitude discussed, 361- 365; compensation, 529; effect of aggressions, 361; efforts to negotiate treaty with, 197, 361-362, 364, 507; treaty, 525-535. Miami purchase, see Land; Symmes' purchase. Miami village (Omie), 32, 192; dist. from Little Miami R., 158; home of hostile tribes, 165; Indian meeting, 301; post suggested, 101, 193; post, 507. Miamis River, see Maumee River. Micheau, —, Gal. prop., 505. Michell, see Mitchell. Michillimackinac, 516, 519, 626; goods brought from, to Sp. market, 331; Indian cession, 527; key to Indian trade, 570, 571; merchants from, 569; merchants trade with Wab. Indians, 381; no. traders in, 564, 655; occup. by U.S., 564, 567; order mentioned for Brit. evacuation, 561; post re- served for U.S., 178; Sargent visits, 574, 576. Michillimackinac Island, Brit, control, 576. Miliet, Jean Baptiste, witness deposi- tion, 291. Military authority, subordinate to civil, 401. Military lands, rights to, not infringed by resol. Cong., 155-156; rights to, admitted, 53. See also Lands; United States Military Lands. Military law, for punish, of crimes in ter., 57. Militia, State, use in frontier defense, 151. Militia, Territorial, instrs. mentioned, 333; land donations to members, 546; to increase regular force, 287. See also Pennsylvania; Virginia. Miller, Christopher, interp. treaty, 534. Millet, —, s. petition, 424. Milliet, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Mills, Maj. John, witness treaty, 533. Mills, Capt., —, 483. Milot(Malliot, Millot), Jacques(Jaque), land claim, 265, 267, 273; s. petition, 250. Mingoes, accused of Big Bottom mas- sacre, 338. Minie, Francois, land claim, 286. Minquet (Minque), —, s. petition, 425. Miro (Mero), Gov. Estevan (La.), 289; procls. re privilege of emigrants, 213-215. Mis-qua-coo-na-caw (Red Pole), Shaw. chief, 537; s. treaty, 531. Missassagues Indians, Brandt visits, 157. Mis-se-no-go-maw, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Mississippi Lake, 275. Mississippi River, 10, 48, 105, 106, 107, 108, 112, 130, 194, 204, 241, 242, 246, 264, 288, 289, 326, 406, 461, 569, 584, 630, 632; bound, of pro- posed grants, 75, 113; bound. of proposed state, 172; Brit, promise goods to Indians on, 301; character of lands near, 211; commerce of 111. along, 330-331; description, 326;
Page 680
680 INDEX Fr. settlements on, 205; laws neces- sary to empower gov. to issue patents to inhabs. near, 322; land claims on, 254, 255, 257, 263, 264, 271; naviga- tion discussed, 209, 210, 440; pro- posed bound, in memorial of Fr., 94; St. Clair instructed to settle land disputes, 146-147; St. Clair ordered to repair to, 197; sale of frontage limited, 78; Sp. reported arming on, 459; trade of, 571-572. Missouri River, 326, 331, 332; explora- tion, 226; illicit commerce, 331, no. of militia from, 631. Mitchell, Col. George, 490; appd. P.M., Limestone, 486; instrs. to, re postal service, 484-485; letters from the P.M. Gen., 484-485, 500-502; letters mentioned from the P.M. Gen., 502, to Craig, 489. Mitchell, James, s. petition, 640. Mitchell, Joseph, land claim, 285. Mitchell (Michell), Stephen M., Cong. com. on ter. affs., 105, 117. Mitchell, —, captured by Indians, 120. Mohawk Indians, not included in treaty of Ft. Harmar, 361. Mohawk River, 438, 482. Mois, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Money, discussion of paper, 46; Kas- kaskians seek to have redeemed, 334- 335; value in Wab. and Miss. R. settlements, 421. Monnot, Stephen (Etienne), acct. of, 599, 600; s. petition, 598. Monnot, —, s. petition, 425. Monplesir, Andrez, land claim, 286. Monroe, James, 6; Cong. com. on ter. affs., 41, 45; s. Va. deed of cession, 9; views re no. states to be erected, 48. Montgomery, John, s. petition, 640. Montgomery, William, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 481. Montreal, 569; traders from, 655. Montres, —, opinion of Sargent re, 399. Mor .ureuil (Montrieul), John Bap- tiste, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 256. Moore, Catherine, widow of James, land claim, 274. Moore, Forga, s. petition, 640. Moore, James, land claim, 274. Moore, John, land claim, 274; s. peti- tion, 253. Mooredock, John, s. petition, 253. Morancy (Merensy, Morency), Jacques (James), Kas. census, 258; land claim, 255. Moravians, 446; lands vested in, 64, 86 Moravian lands, ord. for survey, 153- 155; surveys discussed, 162, 609, 625, 628. See also Christian Indians; Lands; United Brethren. Morehead, Sen. James Turner (Ky.), 393. Morgan, Gen. Daniel, talk with Con- nolly mentioned, 167. Morgan, George, 293, 332; applic. for grant, discussed, 112-113, 138-139, 140, 144-145; Bd. Treas. rept. on proposals, 109-110; Cong. com. rept., 112-113, 129-130, 139-140; interests in New Madrid, 169, 210, 247; letter to Bd. Treas., 156. See also Land. Morgan, John, note, 397. Morins, M., interp. treaty, 534. Morrion, —, Gal. prop., 506. Morris, Robert, note, 24; statement re 111.-Wab. Land co., 428. Morris, Staats, s. Ohio co. indenture, 84. Morrison, William, s. petition, 590. Morristown (N.J.), 488. Morse, Charles, witness N.Y. cession, 5. Moses, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. Muhlenberg, Frederick A., Speaker, H.R., 204, 298, 342. Mulot, —, Cah. census, 259. Munroe, Josiah, 594; instrs. to, 652; mail contract, 596; P.M. at Marietta, 604. Murfln, William, s. petition, 640. Murphy, John, s. petition, 636. Murray, William Vans, recommends Hall for survr. gen., 562. Murry, William, s. petition, 253. Muscle Shoals, question of post at, 225- 226. Muskingum River, 26, 33, 63, 70, 86, 230, 446, 470, 526, 551, 567, 615; appeal for Christian Indians driven from, 102-103; bound. Jefferson Co., 617; dist. to mouth of Ohio, 30; Fr. emigrants arrive at, 337; goods for treaty at, 125-126; hostile Indians on, 126; Indian bound., 444, 605, 606; message of welcome of inhabs. to St. Clair, 132-133; Morav. towns to be surveyed, 162; no. settlers, 470; post mentioned, 410; settlers near, 654; site of towns of Christian In- dians, 147; troops placed on, to protect frontier, 51. See also Mari- etta. Na-goh-quan-gogh (Le Gris), Miami chief, s. treaty, 532. Nah-sho-ga-She, Chip, chief, s. treaty, 533. Nanamakeak, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 179. Na-naw-me, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Nan-guey, Chip, chief, s. treaty, 533. Natchez (Natches), 214, 215, 239, 240, 584; post recommended, 571. Navarre, Francois, appd. j.p., Wayne Co., 568; witness treaty, 534. Navarre, Robert, appd. j.p., Wayne Co., 568. Naw-ac, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Naw-budgh, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Neagey, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 179.
Page 681
INDEX 681 Neau, Michael, land claim, 286. Ne-me-kass (Little Thunder), Chip. chief, s. treaty, 533. Ne-migh-ka (Jose Renard), Indian chief, s. treaty, 532. Ne-nan-se-ka, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Nequea, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 179. Ne-que-taugh-aw, Shaw. chief, s. treaty, 533. Neutrality, persons accused of violat- ing, 461. Neville, John, appd. receiver monies, 562-563, 580; 1nstrs. to, 581-582. New Arrow, see Kanassee. Newbold, Clayton, member N.J. Land co., 129. Newbold, Joseph, member N.J. Land co., 129. Newbold, William, member N.J. Land co., 129. New Haven (Conn.), 657. New Jersey, settlers from, 205. New Jersey Land Company, dissolu- tion, 156; rept. on memorial of Morgan et al, 129. See also Land; Memorials; Morgan, George; Peti- tions. New Madrid, see Anse a la Graise. New Orleans, 215; better prices for furs at, than in Can., 331; goods purchased at, 169, 210; goods sent from, for Indian trade, 381; letters mentioned from, 334, 642; traders from 571. New York (city), 190, 308, 468, 597, 642; Indian treaty ratified at, 219,220; letter from, 222; sale west. lands, 122. New York (state), 438, 444; act of leg. mentioned, 3-4 f advised to en- force laws on frontiers, 57-58; cession west. claims, 3-5; detains Indians from council with St. Clair, 120; hope for peace on frontier, 168; note on west. claims, 5; rept. of Cong. com. on bound, with Mass., I11; west, bound., 4-5. Niagara, 5, 11, 100, 438, 584; Brit. evacuation, 561. Nia-nym-se-ka, Shaw, chief, s. treaty, 531. Nicholas, Josep, witness treaties, 179, 184. Nogales, 642. Northampton County (Pa.), 147. North Bend, number of settlers, 470; Symmes papers at, 344. North Carolina, 8, 13; advised to en- force laws on frontier, 57-58. Northwest Company, 569. Notaries Public, appd. in St. Clair Co., 329. Nowlind, Richard, s. petition, 640. Noy, Mary, widow, s. petitions, 621, 636. Noyes, Joseph, j.p., Wayne Co., 568. Ogle, Benjamin, s. petition, 253. Ogle, Joseph, s. petition, 253. O Hara, Col. James, 483; witness treaty, 533. Ohio Company, 47, 86, 88, 554, 615, 644; bill concerning reptd., 385; bounds of pur., 81; certificates of payments mentioned, 391; contract mentioned, 77; indenture with Bd. Treas., 80-84; meeting in Provi- dence, 91; memorial mentioned, 390; price of pur., 80; pur. discussed, 84, 100, 205-206; rels. to Gal. settlers, 435-436, 462; rels. to Scioto co., 450-451, 466-470. See also Land; Marietta; Scioto Company. Ohio Falls, 26, 160, 247, 335; dist. from Ouiatanon, 158; post at, 571; troops at, 32. Ohio River, 20, 30, 32, 48, 52, 55, 76, 204, 231, 288, 289, 290, 331, 339, 360, 388, 466, 467, 490; bound. Symmes' pur., 491; goods seized, 544; Indian bound., 445; Indian depreds., 227-228, 307, 363; postal service, 482, 489, 502, 541-542, 549-550, 585-586, 652; proposed bound. land pur., 71, 75; to limit sale of front on, 78. O-ki-a, Potawa. chief. s. treaty, 532. Oncahye (Dancing Feather), Six Na- tions chief, s. treaty, 184. Onechsetee (Loaded man), Six Na- tions chief, s. treaty, 184. Oneida Indians, 157, 360. Ordinance of 1784, mentioned, 39, 46; repeal, 50. Ordinance of 1785, see land ordinance. Ordinance of 1787, 149, 172, 247, 335, 499, 567, 612, 617; notes re doc. sources, 39 et seq.; note re jud. construction, 50; text, 39 50. See aZso Territory Northwest of the River Ohio. Orr, Col. Alexander, 502. Orr, James, Kas. census, 258. Osgood, Samuel, member Bd. Treas. 25, 85, 490, 492, 494, 496; note, 25; s. letter re land sales, 74; s. repts. re judges' salaries, 125, land sales, 111, Morgan's memorial, 109. Oswego, 584; Brit. evacuation, 561. Otachsaka (Broken Tomahawk), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Otis, Samuel A., Cong. com. on ter. affs., 130, 139, 140, 144; sec. U.S. Senate, 342; witness Conn. cession, 658. Ottawa (Tawa) Indians, 126, 219, 220; accused of murder, 141; bound. 230- 231, 445; compensation, 529; message mentioned to St. Clair, 121; treaties mentioned, 174, 360, 361, 507; treat- ies, 174-181, 525-535.
Page 682
682 INDEX Ottawa (Tawa) River, 89,126, 127,128, 338. Ouiatanon, 158; Indian cession, 527. Ouiatanon Indians, 547; goods supplied to, 300-301; no treaties held with, 231. Ouilette, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Owenewa (Thrown in the Water), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Pag6, Etienne (Etien, Stephen), Kas. census, 258; land claim, 255; s. peti- tion, 282. Pai-kee-ka-nogh, Indian chief, s. treaty, 532. Pancake (Panncake), Mary, widow, s. petitions, 621, 636. Pancrass (Panerase, Paincrass, Paniras) Marrain (Marin, Marine), Pr. du Pont census, 261; s. petitions, 250, 282 Paris, France, 468, 643. Parker, Joseph, 109, 140; contract discussed, 110-111; note, 76; petition for grant, 74-76; recommend. re, 129-130; rept. of Bd. Treas. re peti- tition, 77. See also Lands; Flint, Royal. Parmentier, —, Gal. prop., 506. Parsons, Samuel, ter. judge, 126, 222; contract mentioned to run line of Conn. Reserve, 212; death, 222-223, 224; evidence offered re liquor selling, 137-138; letters from St. Clair, 161- 162, 171; letter to St. Clair, 137-138; memorial for grant, 29; note, 29; proposals for land pur., 52 56; rept. of Bd. Treas. on memorial, 124-125; submits claims to Cong., 102. See also Ohio Company; Varnum, James M. Pasteur, Capt. Thomas, letter to, 627. Patents, power to issue, 322. Patton, John, s. petition, 640. Patton, Robert, witness Va. cession, 12. Paushquash, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 179. Pawasicko, Chip, chief, s.treaty, 179. Payes, Guillaume, land claim, 286. Pea, Rachel, widow, s. petitions, 621, 636. Peankeunshaw, s. Wab. agree., 375. Peck, Col. William, 587. Pe-da-go-shok, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Pee-jee-wa (Richardville), Miami chief of Eel R. tribe, 507; s. treaty, 532. Pee-kee-lund, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. Pee-ke£-t§16-mund (Thomas Adams), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. Pee-wan-she-me-nogh, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 532. Pekelan, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 179. Pellet, see Pilet. Pelletier (Peltier) dit Antaya, Antoine, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 256. Pelletier (Peltier) dit Antaya, Joseph, land claim, 268; Pr. du Pont census, 260. Pelletier (Peltier, Peltie) dit Antaya, Michel, land claim, 263, 267, 268, 270; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 250. Peltry trade, decline of, 59. Pennsylvania, 4, 5, 12, 13, 23, 49, 147, 204, 211, 212, 562; advised to enforce laws for frontier, 57-58; bound., I11, 213, 445; hopes for peace on frontier, 168; letter from gov. transmitted to St. Clair, 189; methods land sale suggested after system of, 169-170; m1litia and frontier defense, 34, 51, 151, 158, 159, 216, 306; rebel, against excise law mentioned, 458; refuses to honor warrant from Bd. Treas., 98-99. Peoria (Piorias), Indian cession, 527; value, 333. Peoria Indians, abandon country, 547. Pepin, Francis, witness treaty, 534. Pepin, Joseph dit la Chansse, land claim, 272, 273. Perez, Manuel, discusses Am. boy held as prisoner, 234-235, 237-238, 239- 240; letters to St. Clair, 234-240. Perian (Perie) dit Verdihencauer, Louis, land claim, 269; Pr. du Pont census, 261. Perodeau, Joseph, land claim, 286. Perot, Jean, s. petition, 425. Perret, Pierre, land claim, 286. Perrier (Perier), Jacques, s. petition, 278. Perron, Amable, land claim, 286. Perrot, Mary Louis, widow of Nicho- laus, land claim, 286. Perrot, Nicholaus, magistrate at Vin., s. petition, 60. Pe-shaw-kay (Young Ox), Chip. chief, s. treaty, 533. Petit, J., s. state., 425. Petit, Jean, s. petition, 424. Petit, J. G. T., Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 424. Petit, —, s. petition, 425. Petitions, from: Cah., 249-251, Gal., 422-428, 598-601, 111., 68-70, 72-73, 252-253, 590, Knox Co., 620-621, Scioto R. settlers, 638-641, J. C. Symmes, 70-71, Vin., 58-61, 66-67, 634-636, E. Zane, 550-552; petitions mentioned for estab. post-road to Kas., 646, from officers and soldiers Va. line, 321. See also Lands; Memorials. Pettier, Felicitie, widow of Francois, land claim, 286. Pettier, Louisa, widow of Andre, land claim, 286. Pewanakum, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 179. Pey-a-mawk-sey, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532.
Page 683
INDEX 683 Philadelphia, 217, 366, 379, 398, 406, 413, 431, 450, 462, 463, 488, 495, 498, 506, 546, 559, 574, 599, 650; dist. to Ft. Washington, Frankfort and Wheeling, 551; mails sent to Ky., 489; post rider to wait at Pittsburgh for mail from, 503; sale west. lands to begin at, 122. Phillibert, Angelic, widow of Ettienne, land claim, 286. Piankashaw (Peankenshaw, Pianqui- cha) Indians, 158, 231; attitude to- wards U.S., 380; compensation, 529; lands granted to settlers valid if improvements are made, 340; sale of lands, 59, 92, 115-116, 316, 546; s. Wab. agree., 375; treaty, 525-535. See also Eel River and Wea Indians. Piasa (Payisa), suggested as trad. post, 332. Picard, —, s. petition, 425. Pickering, Timothy, Indian commr., P.M. Gen., Sec. State, Sec. War, 455, 490, 505, 534, 537, 538, 539, 561, 562, 564, 566, 567, 580, 588, 597, 641, 642, 643, 648; negotiates treaty Painted Post, 365. See also offices held. Piggot, James, land claim, 274; s. petition, 253. Piggot, William, 235; land claim, 274; s. petition, 253. Pilet (Pellet, Pillet), Louis, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 265, 267, 272 273. Pilet (Pillet), Michel, land claim, 266. Pinckney, Gen. Thomas, mentioned as St. Clair's successor in mil. com- mand, 385. Pipe, Capt., Dela. chief, letter men- tioned from St. Clair, 140-141; rels. with U.S., 137, 165; s. treaty, 179. Pittsburgh, 222, 455, 470, 482, 504, 574; postal service, 131, 484, 485, 503, 603, 652; sale of lands, 562, 566. See also Fort Pitt. Platt, Col. Richard, arranges Game- lin's pay, 300; atty. to Sargent, 190; note, 190. Playfair, William, agent, Scioto co., 466, 468. Point au Fer, 584. Point Coup6, 546; bound. Indian ces- sion, 92. Poirier, see Desloges. Pollard (Polard), Richard, Detroit merchant, note, 580. Pollock, Oliver, member, N.J. Land co., 129. Pope, Worden, P.M., Louisville, 633. Population, estmates, 470, 649. Portages, described, 570-571. Porter, John, s. petition, 253. Postage, expensive in ter., 514. Postal service, between Pittsburgh and Ft. Washington, 503-505; cheaper to follow land routes, 509; delays on Ohio threaten to defeat plan, 502; difficulties in exten. to West, 489- 490; difficulty in regulating, 503-504; discontinued on Ohio, 652; discus- sion of contracts, 595-596; expense, 541, 542, 552, 595, 596-597, 604, 634, 652; exten. to ter., 481-486, 539-542, 585-586, 594-597, 610, 633-634, 646, 652; instrs. re, 594- 595; irregular schedules, 539-542, 595, 603-604, 608; law mentioned re, 483; Putnam's plan, 508; routes, 500-502; schedules, 536, 550; trial on Ohio, 585-586. See also Mail con- tracts. Postmaster General, Habersham: instrs. re postal service, 595; letters men- tioned to: De Hebecourt, 541, 595, McDowell, 540, 541; letters to: De Hebecourt, 539-540, 549-550, 596- 597, 610, Graham, 540-541, Greene, 595-596, 603-604, 608, McDowell, 541-542, Munroe, 594-595, 652, Putnam, 585-586, Turner, 536-537; submits questions to De Hebecourt, 610; surveys postal situation, 608, 610; Pickering: discusses difficulty of extending postal service, 489-490, 500-503; instrs. re postal service, 481- 486, 503-505; letters mentioned to: Barbee, 484, Craig, 500, 501, 502, Mitchell, 484, 485, 500-501, 502, Putnam, 486, 503, 508, 509: letters to: Craig, 481-482,489-490, 502-503, 508, De Hebecourt, 485, Putnam, 482- 484, 486, 503-505, 508-509. See also Mail contracts; Postal service. Postmasters, appt., duties and security discussed, 484, 486. Post roads, proposals for, 550-552. Post Vincennes, see Vincennes. Posts, western, Brit. attitude towards surren., 168; protect frontiers, 100- 102; safety along the Ohio, 142. Potawatomi (Pattawatimie, Putawati- me) Indians, 219, 220, 507; compen- sation, 529; murder of, 542; treaty mentioned, 361; treaties, 174-181, 525-535. See also Indians. Poupart (Poupar, Pourpard), Joseph, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 269, 271. Poupart, Paul, Cah. census 259; land claim, 265, 270, 272, 274, Pradel, —, s. petition, 425. Prairie de Moriway, suggested for vil- lage in 111., 252. Prairie du Chien (Chiennes), 517; trad. post, 571. Prairie du Pont, 263; census, 260-261; claims, 263, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270; description, 326-327; petition, 241- 242. See also Cahokia; Illinois. Prairie du Rocher, 93, 233, 234, 256; description, 327; donation lands, 114, 329, 547; improvements, 140, 145;
Page 684
684 INDEX land surveyed, 276-277; letter from St. Clair, 276-277; letter to St. Clair, 278-279; memorial, 92-94; notary appd., 329; petition, 72-73; represen- tation, 278-279; St. Clair at, 325. See also Illinois; St. Clair County. Pratt, .—, power of attorney from Louviere, 233-234. Preemption, proposals of settlers, 252, 639-640. See also Lands. Presidents of the Continental Congress, Griffin: letters from Sec. at War, 95-98, 121, Tardiveau, 95; memorial from Ettwein, 147-148; St. Clair: let- ters from Sec. at War, 26, 27-28, 64. Presidents of the United States, Adams: letters to: Hamilton Co., 650-651, Sec. State, 650; Washington: 46, 187, 219, 298, 317, 556, 561; alter. Symmes' patent, 490-498; decision re absence ter. officials, 442, 450; dis- approves St. Clair's giving informa- tion re mil. movements, 308-309; draft message, 227-228, 355; instrs. mentioned to St. Clair, 323, to Sec. War, 355; instrs. to Sargent, 611; letters mentioned from: Sec. State, 318, Sec. War, 308, 410; letters men- tioned to Sec. War, 410, 537; letters to: Atty. Gen. 435, heads depart- ments, 447-449, St. Clair, 320-321, 378, 386, Sec. State, 437, 443-444, 450, Sec. War, 299, 308-309, 310, 359, 370, 410-412, 539; messages mentioned re Detroit, 559, 566, 579; nomin. Indian commrs. mentioned, 452; opinions re: absence of officials from ter., 444, 479, concent. troops, 539, Indian pol., 410-412, land titles, 611, negots. with Indians at San- dusky, 447-449, Symmes' pur., 414- 415, utility new posts, 410-411; peti- tion from Vin. discussed, 440; procls., 219-220; submits draft instrs. to Indian commrs., 437; warns St. Clair not to go beyond proper pow- ers, 320-321. See also Adams, John; Washington, George. Presq' Isle, 32, 599; affair mentioned, 487: need for post, 571. Preston (Graham's Station, Ky.), pos- tal service, 502, 504, 508, 540, 541, 542, 595, 603, 604, 608, 610, 652. See also Graham's Station. Prevost, Pierre (Peter), Kas. census, 258; land claim, 255. Prieux, —, s. petition, 424. Printing, need of press, 336. Prioux (Priaux), —, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 425. Prior, Lit. Abner, 302; witness Wab. agree., 375. Prison, ordered to be erected at Kas., 277. Prisoners, exchange between U.S. and Indians, 174, 526. Private contract, protection, 46. Prizon, —, s. petition, 425. Probate court, organized in St. Clair Co., 329. Probate officer, law mentioned on powers and duties, 162. Proclamations, creating Adams Co., 612-613, Jefferson Co., 617-618, Wayne Co., 567-568; organizing Wayne Co. judiciary, 568; of Cont. Cong., mentioned 65, 69, 155; of Govs., mentioned, 246, 247, 305, 329, 334, texts, 456-457, 460-461; of Sp. Gov., 213-215. Procter (Proctor), Col. Thomas, mis- sion to Miami Indians, 364-365. 367; note, 365. Property, laws re descent and con- veyance, 39, 329. Property rights, guaranteed in 111. and Vin., 46. Puan Indians, visit of chiefs to Phila. delayed, 519. Pubert, —, s. petition, 425. Pullaaswaigh, s. Wab. agree., 375. Purviance, —, 120. Putnam, Rufus, 126, 385, 467, 650, 651; ability in treaty making dis- cussed, 413; absence from ter., 431; agree. with Jackson as survr., 613- 614; appd. survr. gen., 588; arranges for carrying Ohio mail, 508; asks for instrs. as survr. gen., 588-589; comm. as ter. judge transmitted to, 241; fin. accts. as survr. gen. dis- cussed and transmitted, 624, 631- 632, 646, 647, 649, 656: instrs. to, as survr. gen., 591-595; instrs. to, re postal service, 482-484; letters mentioned to: P.M. Gen., 503, 508, 509, 585, Sec. State, 588, Sec. Treas., 591, 607, 616, 641, 645, 651, Sec. War, 408, 410, . Wilkinson, 605; letters to: Pres., 293-294, 337-339, Sec. Treas., 588-590, 598, 602, 605-607, 609, 614-616, 624-626, 631-632, 643-644, 645-646, 647, 649, 652-654, 656; mission to Wab. Indians, 405; representation of, 371; notes, 52, 405; opinions re: Hecke- welder, 446, Indian depreds., 338- 339, land surveys, 589; papers sent to re establish. post-offices, 485; proposal for pur. of land, 52; regula- tions re accts. as survr. gen., 591; rels. to Scioto pur., 450-451; repts. re intruding settlers, 654; progress land survey, 602, 605-607, 609, 614-616, 643-644, 645-646, 649, 652- 653; transmits plats Morav. surveys, 616, rept. on Williams' grant, 656; status as Indian supt., 405; status as supreme judge with interests in land co., 499-500; suggests mil. post on Scioto, 502, 505; to investi- gate intruding settlers, 652. See also Land; Ohio company.
Page 685
INDEX 685 Putnam, William Rufus, dep. survr., 609, 624, 625; accts. as survr. 628; repts. progress of surveys, 625-626; witness agree., 614. Quakers, attendance at Indian coun discussed, 446, 449. Quane, Joseph, s. petition, 640. Quantrill, A. R., 393. Quebec, 93,166, 202, 204, 249, 251, 327; rels. of Seminary Foreign missions to Cah. mission, 199-202. Quenez (Querez), Pierre, sr., magistrate of Vin., 283; land claim, 286. Que-shawk-sey (George Washington), Dela. chief, repts. attack, 125-126; s. treaty, 531. Quittel (Quetel), —, Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 424. Racine, Andrez, land claim, 286. Racine, Francois, land claim, 286. Racine dit St. Marie, Jean Baptiste, land claim, 286. Racine, Paul, land claim, 257. Racine, Pierre, land claim, 286. Racine, widow, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 256. Raisin (Raizen, au Resen, Rosine) river, 180, 527, 564; bound. U.S. reserv., 178; traders on, 570. Ralston, Robert, s. petition, 640. Rameau, —, notary, Paris, 468. Ramsey, Allen, s. petition, 621. Randolph, Beverley, Indian commr., 455, 456. Randolph, Edmund, Atty. Gen. and Sec. State, 390, 391, 441, 450, 473, 476, 478, 479, 498, 536, 546. See also Attorney General; Secretary of State. Randolph County, 626. Rankin, see Rink1n. Rapelje, Garret, 109. Raux, Joseph, land claim, 286. Ravalet, Louis, land claim, 286. Reaume, Paul, Kas. census, 258. Receivers of monies, condition of serv- ice, 563; duties, 583; instrs. to, 580- 582. Recording of Deeds, law discussed, 171. Red Feather, see Magh-pi-way. Red Poke, see Mis-qua-coo-na-caw. Redstone (Pa.), 307. Reed, Captain, see Hah-goo-see-kaw. Rees, Azor, land claim, 254. Register of the Treasury, plats of surveys sent to, 616. Religion, extent liberty granted immi- grants in La., 214-215; lands for support, 54, 81, 86, 113, 149-150, 495, 497; liberty, 46, 47. Relle (Relel, Louis, land claim, 267, 273; s. petition, 281. Remsen, Henry jr., witness Va. cession, 9. Renard, Jose, see Ne-migh-ka. Rengez, Pierre. land claim, 286. Revenue, officers to enforce excise law, 522. Reyn-tue-co, Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 532. Rhode Island, settlers from, 206. Richardville, see Pee-jee-wa. Riche, —, Pr. du Pont census, 261. Richon, Pierre, s. petition, 424. Ridge of Rocks, 140, 144, 145; bound. tract for ancient settlers in 111., 114. Right, Gabriel, s. petition, 640. Right, Jobe, s. petition, 640. Righthouse, Thomas, s. petition, 640. Rinkin (Rankin), James, 160; letters mentioned from, 121, 142; witness treaty, 179. Rippey, John, s. petition, 640. River a Maries, 106. River a la Roche, Indians at, promised goods by Brit., 301. River Au Glaize, 178. River au Plein, route for illicit trade with Brit., 331. River au Vase, 326; proposed bound. Morgan grant, 113. River Crouche, 274. River de la Panse, 231. River du Pont, 264, 267. River Marie (River au Marie, Riviere a Marie), bound. recommended for an- cient settlers, 94, 114, 324. Rivers, freedom of navigation, 48, 544, 556; length,"30. Rivier, —, s. petition, 425. Riviere de l'embarras, action of Ky. forces with Indians, 159. Rivoli, Major, —, 619. Robins, John, s. petitions, 621, 636. Rocheblave, Phillippe de, 373; Kas. census, 258. Rogers (Roggers), Benjamin, land claim, 274, s. petition, 253. Rogers, James, s. petition, 640. Rogers, John, s. petition, 640. Rome, John, 420, 506; discusses situa- tion of Gal. settlers, 442-443, 462- 463, 466-469; letters to the Atty. Gen., 450-451, 462-463, the Pres., 442-443; opinion re Putnam's know- ledge Scioto co. affairs, 450-451; s. pet1tion, 424. Ross, Sen. James, connection with west, problems, 623. Rouby, —, s. petition, 424. Roussiault, Louis, land claim, 286. Roy dit Pense, Jean Piere, land claim, 266. Royal Company of the Indies, 231. Rutherford, Larken, land claim, 275. Ryan, Catherine, land claim, 275. Ryan, Josiah, land claim, 275. Sabolle, Joseph, land claim, 286. Sac (Sakies, Sauk) Indians, 219, 220, 361, 507; treaty, 174-181. See also Indians.
Page 686
686 INDEX St. Aubin, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. St. ChartAn, Touts, s. petition, 250. St. Clair, Gov. Arthur, 132, 133, 138, 179, 184, 252, 261, 262, 279, 343, 348, 373, 378, 390, 413, 421, 431, 434, 437, 438, 453, 456, 459, 460, 461, 463, 476, 479, 519, 641; absence from ter., 312, 416, 430, 442, 444, 450, 455, 471-472, 475-476, 511, 558, 560, 564, 565, 647- 648; cites need print. press, 336; con- troversy with: Sargent, 573-575, Tur- ner, 509-510, 512-515, 518; descrip- tion N.W.Ter. by, 204-212; instrs. to, 78-79, 117-118, 146-147, 197, 224; letters mentioned to: Hamtramck, 335, Indians, 130, inhabitants of Gal., 337, Manuel Perez, 239-240, Pipe, 141, Pres., 247, 320, 383, 386, Sec. For. Affs. (Jay), 188, W. St. Clair, 512-513, Sargent, 222, 300, 511, 573, 575, Sec. State, 517, 521, 523, 542, 544, Sec. Treas., 349, 585, Sec. War, 103, 121, 130, 136, 140, 143, 152, 155, 160, 164, 165, 173, 189, 309, Symmes, 347, Turner, 512, 544, Wyllis, 167; letters to: Atty. Gen., 319-320, Bd. Treas., 98-99, Cont. Cong., 151-152, 163- 164,194-195, de la Condreniere, 232- 233, A. Girardin, 263-276, Ham- tramck, 229-230, inhabs. of Gal., 311- 312, inhabs. of Pr. du Rocher, 276-277, Indians, 127-129, Parsons, 161-162, 171, Perez, 233-234, 235- 236, 237-238, Pres., 191-193, 204- 212, 216-217, 244-248, 321, 370, 376-377, 383-384, 386-387, 430, 455, Sargent, 221-222, 283-284, 287, 312- 313, 384-385, 397-398, 511- 513, Sec. For. Affs., 166-170, Sec. State, 230-231, 322, 323-337, 457- 458, 499-500, 515-518, 519-520 (E.), 522- 523, 535-536, 542-549, Sec. Treas., 347-348, 420-421, 458-459, 523- 524, Sec. War, 89-91, 119-120, 125-127, 130-132, 136-137, 140-143, 152-153, 156-160, 160-161, 164-165, 197-198, 306-308, 309, 372-373, Symmes, 342-343, Turner, 509-510, 513-515, Varnum, 161-162, U.S. Cong., 194-195; memorial and peti- tion, 437-438; mil. activities: 376, 377, 378, 382, 383, 386-387, 397-398, defeat by Indians and investigation of, 368, 376-377, 383, 384-385, 386, 397-398, 430, 471, resignation of, 376, status as commander, 370, 371, 372, 376-377, 378; note, 283; opinions, 204-212, 330, 333, 336, 383-384, 397, 499-500, 509-510, 513-514; opinions re: commerce in ter., 330- 334, 517, Indian policy, 197, 211-212, 543, land claims, 325, 327, 328, 329- 330, location ter. capital, 312, 512, U.S. and ter. laws, 457-458, 514, 519- 520, 523-524, powers of gov. and judges, 206-207, slavery in ter., 332- 333, Symmes pur., 342-343, 347-348; procls. mentioned, 334, 348; procls., 456-457, 460-461; recommends., repts. and decisions re land grants and claims, 163, 245-246, 323- 337, 342-343, 499-500; rels. with Indians, 77, 116, 121, 128-129, 131, 140-141, 163, 164-165, 170, 174, 179, 182, 184, 186, 191, 194-195, 219-220, 364, 365, 367, 453, 514; repts. of, 323-337, 420-421, 542-549; suggests law to escheat lands, 330; travels in ter., 224, 229, 283-284, 287, 294, 312, 325, 518, 544. See also President of Continental Congress; Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, Gov- ernor; Superintendent of Indian Ai- fairs for the Northern District. St. Clair, Arthur, jr., atty. gen., opin- ion mentioned re privileges Brit, sub- jects, 623. St. Clair, William, clerk of courts, St. Clair Co., 373, 374, 572, 627, 633; letters mentioned to Pasteur, 627, Gov. St. Clair, 459, 509, 510, 512, Turner, 509; letter to Gov. St. Clair, 373. St. Clair County, 247, 300, 328, 373, 432, 514, 574; difficulties re judges, 513; erection, 323; estab. of courts, 328-329; militia, 328; memorial, 279- 282. St. Clair River, Brandt passes down, 157. St. Etienne, Michael, Kas. land claim, 257. St. Genevieve, letter of comman. of, to St. Clair, 231-232. St. Joseph, trad. post, 570. St. Joseph Island, Brit. post on, 570. St. Joseph River, 527. St. Lawrence River, 48, 584. St. Louis, 326, 332, 334. St. Marie, Etienne, land claim, 286. St. Marie, Joseph (de), 170, 288-291, 294-295; letters to Hamtramck, 288- 290, Sargent, 288-291; land claim, 286. St. Mary's River, 526, 527, 568, 570; trade by Falls of, 577. St. Philippe (Phillips), 112, 256, 274; land grants, 114, 547; memorials, 72-73, 92-94. St. Pierre, Francois Derousse, Kas. census, 258. St. Pierre, Jean Baptiste Derouse, Kas. census, 258. St. Pierre (St. Piere), Joseph Derouse, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 257. St. Pierre, Michel Derouse, Kas. cen- sus, 258. St. Pierre, —, priest at Cah., 202. St. Sulpice, missionaries receive grant, 93. Salem, 63, 147, 154, 592; land reserved, 18, 86; survey, 63, 162. See also Gnadenhutten, Schoenbrun.
Page 687
INDEX 687 Salt River, 159. Salt springs, reservation, 554. Sandusky (Lower Sandusky), 454; In- dian councils, 141, 435, 438-439, 446, 447-449, 452-454, 527; trad. post, 570. Sandusky Lake, 32, 527. Sandusky River, 528. Sans Crainte, Jean Baptiste (Bt.) Ro- main dit, interp. treaty, 534. Sansfacon, see Harmand. Sarazin (Sarrazin), —, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 425. Sargent, Winthrop, Sec. Ter., 70, 76, 78, 80, 84, 285, 288, 291, 304, 306, 313, 401, 466, 467, 468, 479, 489, 566, 568, 569, 613; absence, 312-313, 463- 464; agent Ohio co., 80; complaints against, 518; contract with Bd. Treas., 85-88, discussed, 77,110-111, 417-420; controversy with St. Clair, 573-575; declines office adj.-gen., 408; duties discussed, 336, 471, 559, 560; expenses, 190-191, 223-224, 295-296, 308, 406-407, 463-464, 473- 474, 475-476, 480-481, 564, 567, 574 587, 632-633; Indian pol., 406, 576; instrs. to, 611; land activities, 162, 478, 587, 630; letters mentioned to: Gilman, 623, Pres., 300, 314, 317, Putnam, 294, St. Clair, 221, 222, 283, 397, 443, 511, 574, Sec. Cont. Cong., 189-190, Sec. State, 449, 564, 565, 567, 611, 623, 641, 642, Sec. War, 220, 398, 407, 408, Symmes, 303, 305, 402, 403, 408, 430-431, Turner, 303, 305; letters to: Baird, 285-287, Bd. Treas., 61-63, A. Gamelin and others, 292-293, inhabs. of Gal., 417-420, Pres., 222-223, 229, 294-296, 314- 315, 348-349, 405-406, 429, 463-464, Ross, 630-631, St. Clair, 91-92, 300- 302, 429, 430-431, 432-434, 573-576, Sec. State, 472, 478, 480-481, 558- 559, 560-561, 563-564, 576-580, 587- 588, 597, 618-620, 622-624, 626, Sec. Treas., 471-472, Sec. War. 223- 224, 398-401, 404-405, 406-407, 412 413, Thomson, 187, 190-191, 198; memorial mentioned, 480, 481; me- morial, 318-319; mil. service as adj.- gen., 398-399; note, 61; opinions, 399, 406, 411-412, 413, 432, 434, 579, 623, 626; opinions re: character set- tlers, 578, 622, div. of ter., 618, 622- 623, judges, 413, 429, 431, 432, 433, 434, 618-619, land claims, 578, re- spective duties of gov. and Indian supt., 191, status of act. gov., 564; organizes Wayne Co. judiciary, 568- 569; procls. creating Adams Co., 612- 613, Jefferson Co., 617-618, Wayne Co., 567-568; repts., 187, 315-317, 563-564, 576-580; travels in ter., 563-564, 573-574, 577, 618, 619, 622, 626, 641. Saucier, Baptist, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 271; s. petition, 242. Saucier (Saussier), Francois, 264; Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 265, 269, 273. Saucier, Mathieu (Mathi), Cah. census, 259; land claim, 270, 271. Saugrain, Af., Gal. prop., 505; s. peti- tion, 425. Savery, J., letter to Sen. Brown, 637- 638. Sawedowa (The Blast), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Schoenbrun (Shoenburn), 63, 147, 154, 592; land reserved, 18, 86; survey, 162, 614. See also Salem; Gnaden- hutten. Schuyler, Gen. Philip J., 367. Sciahowa (Council Keeper), Six Na- tions chief, s. treaty, 184. Scioto (Sioto) company, 311-312, 637; bound. of pur., 86, 445; Cong. com. repts. re, 135; hist. of operations, 385, 417-420, 422-428, 450-451; inden- ture with Bd. Treas., 85-88; method of pur., 87; price of pur., 85-86; rel. to Gal., 337, 462-463, 599; rel. to Ohio co., 466-470. Scioto River, 8, 18, 30, 32, 33, 52, 55, 72, 86, 134, 155, 294, 321, 466, 467, 550, 551, 554, 568, 615, 644; Fr. emi- grate to, 337; Indian bound. line, 445; intruding settlers, 654; land for Va. troops between Little Miami and, 296-297; mail boats to meet near, 502; mil. post suggested on, 502; pe- tition of settlers on, 638-641. Scott, Gen. Charles, 482, 486. Scott, James, s. petition, 253. Scott, John M., del. in Cong., 4. Se-Caw, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 533. Secretary at War, see Secretary of War. Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Jay: letter from St. Clair, 166-170; letter mentioned from St. Clair, 188; letter to St. Clair, 188. See also Secretary of State. Secretary of Continental Congress, Thomson: 18, 22, 42; letters from St. Clair, 151-152, 163-164, Sargent, 187, 190-191, 198; letter mentioned from Ettwein, 102; letters men- tioned to St. Clair, 151, 163: letters to Gov. of Va., 19, St. Clair, 78-79, 102-103, 138, 150, Sargent, 189-190; witness Conn. cession, 24, N.Y. ces- sion, 5, Va. cession, 9. See also Thomson, Charles. Secretary of State, Jefferson: connec- tion with Indian affs., 354, 355, 438- 439, 447; connection with land ques- tion: power to countersign patents, 298, questions Symmes re intruders on pub. lands, 349-350, repts. men- tioned, 353, 390, submits papers relating to Symmes' claim, 352; departments with which ter. gov.
Page 688
688 INDEX corresponds, 460; letters mentioned to: Pres., 318, 450, St. Clair, 457, Speaker H.R., 372, Symmes, 349; letters to: Billet, 440, Pres., 315, 350, 351, 352, 354, 371-372, 379, 442, 446, 447, Putnam, 241, B. Randolph, 438- 439, St. Clair 349, 416, 460, Speaker H.R., 369, 372, Symmes, 349-350, 352-353, 401, 459-460, Turner, 416, 449, 452; repts. of, 315-317, 351, 412, 442, 444-445; Pickering: instrs. to Sargent to proceed to 111., 611; let- ters mentioned to Sargent, 576, 618; letters to: Gilman, 584-585, Harrison, 648, Meigs, 642, Pres., 561-562, St. Clair, 629, Sargent, 565-566, 567, 611, 641, 642-643, Sec. Treas., 632- 633; opinions re: internal enemies, 611, occup. of Detroit, 565-566, power of gov. and act. gov., 629, Sargent's bill of expenses, 632-633; transmits recommend. for survr. gen., 561-562; Randolph: letters to: Atty. Gen., 474-475, Brit. Minister (Hammond), 518-519, Tench Coxe, 519-520, Pres., 472-473, 476, 479, 495, St. Clair, 479-480, Sargent, 479- 480, Sec. War, 476; opinion re rept. of proceeds. in ter., 472-473; refers letter to Brit. minister revealing in- trigue with Indians, 518; St. Clair transmits part of Turner's letter to, 513, 515-517. See also Jefferson; Pickering; Randolph; Secretary for Foreign Affairs. Secretary of the Treasury, Hamilton: 463-464; instrs. to Ludlow discussed 342-343; letters mentioned to St, Clair, 420; rept. mentioned, 481; rept. on Sargent's memorial, 473- 474; Wolcott: duties of, in land sales, 554, 555-556; instrs. mentioned to Putnam, 605, 606-607; instrs. to Put- nam, 651; letters mentioned to Galla- tin, 392, Putnam, 598, 602, 605, 607, 609, 631, 645, 652, 653, 654, St. Clair, 523, Wayne, 569, 584; letters to Neville, 562-563, 580-582, Putnam, 591-594, 603, 607, 628, 641. 645, 650, 651, St. Clair, 521-522, 585, Sargent, 566, supts. of land sales, 583-584, Wallace, 562. Secretary of War, Knox: duties re ter. matters, 14, 17, 20, 24, 27, 57, 76, 298; instrs. from Pres., 359; letters mentioned to Blount, 409, Pres., 308, 410, St. Clair, 130, 143, 152, 173, 189, Wayne, 409; letters to Dandridge, 500, Gov. H. Lee, 453- 454, Indian Commrs., 454-455, Pres. Cont. Cong., 26, 27-28, 64, 95-98, 121, Pres. U.S., 196, 321, 371, 408- 410, 414, 436, 446, 486-487, St. Clair, 118, 136, 165-166, 173, 224- 226, 453, Sargent, 220-221, 407-408; mil. activities re ter., 51, 100-102, 355, 502; opinion re Heckewelder, 446; rept. on emigration to ter., 196; repts. and recommends. re Indian affs., 31-35, 100-102, 103-105, 118, 313-314, 359-366, 409, 436,453,486- 487,500; repts. and recommends. re lands, 26-27, 28, 122; McHenry: letter mentioned to Lord Dorchester, 561, Wilkinson, 607; letter to Pres., 561; Pickering: letters to Dandridge, 507, Pres., 519, 537-539, Sec. State, 508; orders visit of Indian chiefs postponed, 519; St. Clair submits part of letter from Turner, 513. See also Knox; McHenry; Pickering. Secretaries to the President, see Dan- dridge, Bartholomew; Jackson, Wil- liam; Lear, Tobias. Secretary, Territorial, see Territory Northwest of the River Ohio. Sedam, Ens. Cornelius R., accompanies Doughty mission, 364. Sedgwick, Theodore, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 398, 425, 436. Se-ga-ge-wan, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Seguin dit Laderoute, Jean Baptiste, Kas. census, 258; s. petition, 282. Seguin dit Laderoute (Seguine la Denite), Louis, Kas. census, 258; land claim, 257; s. petition, 282. Seguin dit Laderoute (Seguine la Deroute), widow of James, land claim, 255. Seignorial title, status under Ft. rule, 261-262. Seminary of Quebec, superior of, letter mentioned to St. Clair, 328; letter to inhabs. Cah., 199-202. Seneca Indians, journey to Ft. Har- mar, 143, 153, 156-157. See also Indians; Six Nations. Seney, Joshua, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 130, 156. Serre, Quiff, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 424. Serrot, —, Gal. prop., 506; s. petition, 425. Sessewa (Big bale of a Kettle), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Seven Ranges, 32, 55, 76, 206; as bound. line, 52, 445; provisions re sale, 14, 566, 583-584; survey, 24-25, 592. Severns, Ebenezer, land claim, 275; s. petition, 253. Seybold, Robert, s. petition, 253. Sha-aw-run-the, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 531. Sha-me-kun-ne-sa (Soldier), Miami chief, s. treaty, 531. Sharp, John, s. petition, 640. Sha-tey-ya-ron-yah (Leather Lips), Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 531. Shawnee (Shawanese, Shawonee) In- dians, 142, 165, 195, 361, 414, 547, 609; bound. line, 231, 445; compen- sation, 529; hostilities, 31, 50; rivalry with Wyandots, 180,192-193; treaties
Page 689
INDEX 689 mentioned, 103-104, 360; treaties, 525-535. See aho Indian Treaties. Shee, John, s. memorial, 387. Sheely, Henry, s. petition, 640. Shelby, David, s. petition, 640. Shelby, Gov. Isaac (Ky.), 486. Shell, Joseph, s. petition, 253. She-win-se, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Shoenburn, see Schoenbrun. Shignie (Sheinor), Jacque, land claim, 254. Signoux, —, accused of violating neu- trality, 461. Silavan, John, s. petition, 253. Silby, Thomas, s. petitions, 621, 636. Simcoe, John Graves, Lt. Gov. of Upper Can., 488; confer, with Six Nations, 538; reported at Miami Rapids, 487. Simpson, John, Kas. census, 258. Simpson, William, s. petition, 640. Simpson, —, cashier U.S. Bank, direc- tions to, mentioned, 633. Sinclair, Lt. Gov. Patrick, 576, governs Michil. island, 576. Sioux Indians, visit of chiefs to Phila. should be delayed, 519. Sirson, —, s. petition, 425. Siscomb, Billy, see Wey-win-quis. Six Nations Indians, 194, 487; confer, with Simcoe, 538; desire peace, 157; message from St. Clair discussed, 164; note, re land claims, 5; St. Clair awaits arrival, 120, 141; treaties mentioned, 360, 361, 365, 447; treaty, 182-186. See also Indians. Skahomat, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Skinner, William, 602, 609, 631, 649, 656. Slavery, 579; Americans who feared loss of slaves gone to Sp. ter., 247, 332; prohib. in ter. and its interpret., 49, 149, 248. Small, John, s. Vin. address, 65. Smith, Maj. Ballard, letter mentioned to Wilkinson, 412. Smith, Christopher, s. petition, 253. Smith, Ebenezer, witness N.Y. ces- sion, 5. Smith, Isaac, member N.J. Land co., 129. Smith, Rev. James, 252. Smith, Melancthon, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 35. Smith, Nicholas, land claim, 274; s. petition, 253. Smith, Thompson, s. petition, 640. Smith, William, s. memorial, 387. Smith, —, action against Harrison, 400, 402. Snake, see Kiahtulaho. Sohaeas (Falling Mountain), Six Na- tions chief, s. treaty, 184. Soldier, see Sha-me-kun-ne-sa. Sonachshowa (Full Moon), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Soskene, Chip, chief, s. treaty, 179. Souspre, Joseph, land claim, 269. South Bend (Hamilton Co.), no. inhabs., 470, 648-649. South Carolina, 217, 385. Spain, 32, 459, 611; attitude toward West, 170, 209-210, 461, 547-548, 642; commerce with 111., 330-334; grants land to Americans, 168; treaty mentioned, 584. Spear, Lt. Edward, rept. of, trans- mitted, 121. Spencer, Col. Oliver, forwards address of Hamilton Co., 650. Springfield (Hamilton Co.), no. inhabs., 649. Sproat, Earl, pay. to, 653. Sproat, Ebenezer, note, 133; s. message of welcome to St. Clair, 133. Stagg, John, 375. States, regulations re promotion and admission to Union, 48-49. Stay6-tah, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 532. Steele, John, note, 439. Stites, Benjamin, contracts mentioned, 391; memorial mentioned, 388. Stinson, Robert, s. petition, 640. Stockton, Richard, member N.J. Land co., 129. Stockton, Sam. W., member N.J. Land co., 129. Stone, Maudelin, widow of Joseph, land claim, 287. Stucker, Henry, s. petition, 640. Sturges, Jonathan, del. in Cong., 22, 23, 24. Sug-ga-nunk, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Sullivan, John, land claim, 276. Sun, see Kee-sass. Sun-fish Creek, 585. Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Northern District, 50,79, 530; duties and powers, 57, 138, 247-248, 421; letter mentioned to Sec. War, 121; office united with that of gov., 189- 190, 421; recommended to examine Ill.-Wab. co. claims, 116. See also Butler, Richard; Indians; St. Clair, Gov. Arthur. Superintendent of land sales, see Land. Supplement to Land Ordinance, text, 122-124. See also Land Ordinance of 1785. Supreme Court, Territorial, federal courts should review decisions, 499- 500. See also Territory Northwest of the River Ohio. Surveyor General, appt., 588; arts. agree. with Jackson, 613-614; asks for instrs., 588; compensation, 557; duties, 553; instrs. to, 591-594; pro- vision for appt., 552-553; regulat1ons re expenses, 593. See also Putnam, Rufus. 126650—34- -Vol. 2 45
Page 690
690 INDEX Surveyors, delays in work, 643-644, 645; duties and pay, 12-14, 123, 135, 557; fin. aects., 631-632; U.S. geog- rapher to appoint, 135. Surveys, 111. memorial to be excused from pay. for, 94, 279-281, trans- mitted, 324; Morav. lands: memorial, 147-148, ord., 153-155; recording, 123-124; U.S. army land, 95-98. See also Land; Putnam, Rufus. Susquehanna River, 508. Suters, George, s. petition, 640. Swan, Caleb, witness treaty, 533. Swan, Samuel, clerk of courts, Hamil- ton Co., 404. Swimmer, —, agent for St. Marie, 288. Swimming Fish, see Kiondushowa. Symmes, John Cleves, 224, 393, 433, 457, 470, 490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 495, 496, 497, 498; absence from ter. 430-431, 459-460, 488; conduct as judge, 294, 302, 400, 429, 432, 544, 606, 618-619; expenses as judge to be paid, 396; land speculator and judge 1n land cases, 499-500; letters men- tioned to Bd. Treas., 389, 390, Pres., 391, 392, St. Clair, 348, 349, 390, Sec. State, 352-353, 379, 401, Sec. Treas., 392, Vice-Pres., 392; letters to St. Clair, 343-347, Sargent, 302- 304, 402-404; note, 70; opinion re powers of civil officers, 402-404. Symmes Purchase (Miami Purchase), 64, 445, 488; acts re, 388-389, 394- 395; alter. of patent, 492-495; bound. discussed, 71, 342-343, 344, 346; bounds., 490-491, 492-493, 497-498; contract mentioned, 77, 390, 491; grant to be investigated, 414-415; land sold beyond bounds. discussed, 343-347, 349-350, 415; new patent issued, 496-498; papers re mentioned, 352, 389-393; pet1tions re, 70-71, 490-492; petit1ons mentioned re, 71, 75, 389, 392, 393; pur. discussed, 110; sources cited, 388, n. 66, 394, n. 8, 11, 12, 395, n. 13. Tabeau (Tabout), widow, land claim, 270. Tamarois, missionaries granted land by Fr., 327. Tardiveau (Tardeveau), Bartholemew, agent for 111. settlers, 105, 108; land claim, 256; letters to Pres. of Cong., 95, St. Clair, 99-100; note, 67; rept. on memorial, 149-150; s. petitions, 67, 70, 73, 94, 281. See also Memor- ials; Petitions. Tar-he (Crane), Wyan. chief, speech from Wayne, 507; s. treaties, 179, 531. Tawa Indians, see Ottawa Indians. Tawa River, see Ottawa River. Taxes, regulations re, 47-48; Spaniards exempt home products from, 169. Tearing Asunder, see Hickonquash. Teataway, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 179. Te-Haaw-to-rens, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 532. Tekahias (Long Tree), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 184. Tellier (Tellie), Armant (Amant), land claim, 264, 269; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petition, 282. Tellier, Gabriel, land claim, 269; Pr. du Pont census, 261. Templin, Robert, s. petition, 640. Templin, Salmon, s. petition, 640. Templin, Terah, s. petition, 640. Tennessee River, 134, 225, 307; Indian attacks on, 364. See also Cherokee River. Tepakee, Sac chief, s. treaty, 179. Terhataw, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, 461, 548; alter. Va. cession, 172-173; atty. gen., need of, 207-208, 319-320; bounds., 204; council, basis of or- ganiz., 44-45; disturbances in west. counties, 542-544; div. discussed, 567, 612-613, 617-618, 622-623; exec. jour., 187, 229, 315, 320, 348-349, 350, 352, 371, 472-473, 574, 575; govt.: act for, 203-204, 395-396, dis- cussion, 205-208, 460, 535, 629; gov.: absence, 471-472, 474, 475-476, 479, 480-481, 564, 647, duties and powers, 42- 44, 77, 106-108, 123, 190, 203, 205, 216, 306, 432, 477, 556, 565-566, 573-575, 629, procls. discussed, 334, 348, procls., 456-457, 460-461, qualif. and term, 41, salary, 195, 248, supt. of Indian affs., 189-190; judges: ab- sence, 246, 320-321, 352-353, 373- 374, 379, 406, 416, 430-431, 432, 433, 442, 444, 446, 449, 450, 452, 460, 622, appts., 241, 584-585, 642, powers de- fined, 41-43, 45, 396, have no power in Indian affs., 514, propose council, 302, reasons for not holding gen. court, 303-304, surveyors to take oath before, 123; judiciary, defects, 224, 499-500, 543, 618; laws: dis- cussed, 42-43, 45, 161-162, 171, 206- 207, 224, 303-304, 319, 336, 369, 396, 400, 457-458, 579, powers of Cong, re, 43, 473, print. and distrib., 189, 369, 372, 396, 401, 472, 535, trans- mitted to Cong., 187, transmitted to Sec. State, 535, 567; legislature: 302, 457,458, duties of clerk, 396, organiz., 43- 45, power and duties, 42-43, 396, 433-434, 513-514; pol. re land, 552- 557, 638-640, 651, 654; postal serv- ice, 539-542, 585-586, 594-597, 603- 604, 608, 610, 633-634, 646, 652; road to Cincinnati, 550-552; seal, 535-536, 573; secretary: duties, 46, 295-296, 318-319, 396, 480-481, 565- 566, tenure, 41; statistics re, 196, 221, 224, 470. Teta-boksh-ke (Grand Glaize King), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532.
Page 691
INDEX 691 Teverbough, Jacob, s. petitions, 621, 636. Tewanias (Broken Twig), Six Nations chief, s. treaty, 185. Teyandat'on'tic, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 179. Tey-yagh-taw, Wyan. chief, s. treaty, 532. Thacher, George, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 98; letter from Burrall, 646; note, 646. Thaub, —, s. petition, 425. Thaumur, see Lasource dit Thaumur. Thaw-me (LeBlanc), Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Thevenin, H., s. petition, 425. Thomas, —s. petition, 425. Thompson, Ens. Robert, witness trea- ties, 179, 184. Thomson, Charles, 5, 9, 19, 24, 39, 42, 150, 152, 164, 187, 190, 191, 198. See also Secretary of Continental Congress. Thorn, Michael, jr., s. petition, 636. Tho-wo-na-wa, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 533. Thrown in the Water, see Owenewa. Thu-pe-ne-bu, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Tibault, (Thibault Tibot), Francois, land claim, 258; s. petitions, 278, 281. Tibault (Thibault, T1bot), Joseph, land claim, 257; s. petition, 281. Tillaye, —, s. petition, 425. Tobacco, bought at New Orleans, 169. Todd, John, Lt. of 111. Co., and com- mand. in chief under Va., 283; activ- ities, 324-325; instrs. to, mentioned, 284; orders land grants, 93. See also Illinois. Tomur, J. Baptiste, s. petition, 282. Tougas, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Tougas, Joseph, land claim, 286. Touranjeau, see Godin. Township, allotments, 24; regulations re marking and sale, 13-16, 553-554; sketch of plat, 594. See also Land; Seven Ranges. Tracy, Sen. Uriah, s. Conn. cession, 658. Trade routes, 570-571. Trading posts, reservs. for Indians, 177-178. Treason, no federal law, re, 188, no ter. law, 319; Va. law may be invoked against Connolly, 167. Treaties, see Indian treaties. Treaty of Paris (1763), mentioned, 107. Trent, William, 117. Trigg (Treeck), Col. Stephen, 249, 251. Troge (Droge, Troje), Pierre, 234, 237; compensation for care of child, 235- 237; must return kidnapped child, 234-235. Troops, State, 216. See also Militia. Troops, United States, 216-217; bounty lands 95-98; command. to sign passes, 57; concent., recruit. and distrib., 32-34, 101, 160, 221, 368- 369, 385, 538, 539; purpose on fron- tier, 31-35, 51, 125, 135, 593; sup- plies, 411-412, 538, 572. See also Lands; Moravian Lands. Trottier, August (Augustrotie), land claim, 273; s. petition, 281. Trottier, August, the son, land claim, 271. Trottier (Trotia, Trotier), Clement (Clemand), 259; land claim, 271, 272: s. petition, 281. Trottier, Francois, the Elder, 259; land claim, 264, 271, 273. Trottier, Francois, the son, land claim, 271. Trottier, Joseph, land claim, 271. Trottier, Joseph, the son, land claim, 270, 271. Trottier (Trotier), Louis, 259; land claim, 267, 268, 270, 272; s. petition, 250. Trudeau (Tardeau), Zenon, command. at St. Louis, 548, 631. Trudel, Francois, land claim, 286. Trueman, Capt. Alexander, mission, to west. Indians, 409. Trumbull, Jonathan, Speaker H.R., 389, 395, 396. Tucker, Thomas Tudor, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 146. Tupper, Benjamin, member Ohio co., 467. Turgeon, Marie Riviere, widow, Cah. census, 259; land claim, 264, 265, 266, 269, 273. Turner, Adam, s. petition, 640. Turner, George, judge, 71, 222, 294; absence from ter., 224, 227, 416, 431, 442, 444, 446, 449, 450, 452, 457, 460, 618; appt. as ter. judge, 217. 218; charges against, 452, 512-513, 522, 543; compensation, 396; letters mentioned to St. Clair, 513, 515, 543, 544, W. St. Clair, 509, Sargent, 510; letters to Pres., 218, St. Clair, 515-517, Sargent, 302-304, 305-306; makes charges against W. St. Clair, 509-510; note, 217; opinion on trade in ter., 515-517; resigns, 622. Turner, John, s. petition, 640. Turpin, Francois, land claim, 286. Tuscarora (Tuscarawa) River, 230, 609; Indian bound., 175, 444. Twenty Canoes, see Cachunwasse. United Brethren, act re, mentioned, 590; appeal for Christian Indians, 102-103; memorial, 147-148; sur- vey of lands, 592, 606, 614. See also Christian Indians; Land; Mora- vians. United Land Companies of the Illinois and Wabash, see Illinois-Wabash Land co. United States, 48, 58, 364, 380, 381, 389, 406, 462, 538, 543, 558, 580, 611, 623, 629, 638; Atty. Gen.,
Page 692
692 INDEX opinion on excise law, 520-521; bound., 172, 572; Indian pol. and rels., 90, 177, 216, 359-366, 374-375, 444-445, 452-456, 528-529, 530-531; mil. lands, 95-98, 651, survey, dis- cussed, 592, 602, 606, 613, 615-616, 643, 649, 652-653, 656. See also Indians. United States Congress, 385, 430, 463, 464-465, 565; action on ter. laws, 473; com. repts. mentioned, 390, 392, 393, 443, repts., 435-436, 475-476; investigates St. Clair's de- feat, 383, 384, 386, 387, 397-398, 400, 430; laws: application in ter. dis- cussed, 40, 176, 322, 458, 519-520, 521, 523-524, copies furnished to ter. districts, 318, mentioned, 299, 333-334, 391, 400, 404, 457, 473, 474, 477, 483, 491, 493, 497, 515, 535, 558, 562, 588, 592, 594, 612, 613, 614, 629, 631, 639, 650, no law against treason, 188, texts, 203-204, 296-298, 339-342, 388-389, 394-396, 552-557; resols. mentioned, 369, 372. See also Continental Congress. Vachette, Francois, land claim, 286. Vade, see Levasseur. Vadebon, Louis, s. petition, 250. Vallez, Alexander, land claim, 286. Valliere, Sp. command. Arquancas post, 288, 289, 290. Valton, Francis, acct. of, 599, 601; s. petitions, 425, 598. Vandalia company, 117. Vanden Benden, Louis, Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 425. Vanden Benden, Martinus, s. petition, 425. Vanderburgh, Henry, 292, 544; com- plains against Judge Turner, 512; complaints against, 544; letters mentioned to St. Clair, 522, Sargent, 404, 512. Vandike, Henry, member N.J. Land co., 129. Vanelson, Elisha, land claim, 275. Van Wickle, Everit, member N.J. Land co., 129. Vardon, David, jr., member N.J. Land co., 129. Varnum, James Mitchell, ter. judge, 91, 126; death, 187, 198; letter from St. Clair, 161-162; note, 91; submits claim to Cong., 102,124-125. Vaudrye, Antonie, land claim, 286. Vaudrye, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Vaudrye, John Baptiste, jr., land claim, 286. Vauschert, Freres, Gal. prop., 506. Venango, 211; troops at, 32, 33, 51. Venerst, —, land claim, 276. Verts, Lemme, s. petition, 424. Veto, of fence law, 304. Vigo, Francois, 285, 301, 307, 405, 406; s. address to Sargent, 292; tried trade route over Am. soil, 331; land claim, 286; witness treaty, 533. Villiren, F., s. petition, 424. Vilray, John Baptiste, land claim, 286. Vimont, Lewis, acct. of, 599, 600; s. petition, 598. Vincennes (Post St. Vincennes, Post St. Vincents, Post Vincennes), 27, 48, 59, 66, 99-100, 172, 302, 307, 362, 363, 368, 445, 516, 621; address to Harmar, 65-66, Sargent, 291-292; Americans invited by Fr. to settle, 66; Am. land ownership status, 620- 621; census, 285-287; charter sur- rend., 59; confirm. of land titles, 8, 340, 528, 545; dist. from Kas., 634, Louisville, 634, Terre Haute, 158; Indian rels., 58, 60, 374-375, 404; land: claims, 59-60, 578, donation, 197, 339-342, 619, grants, 283, 544, patents, 322, 472, 475; petitions, 58- 61, 66-67, 92-94, 634-636; petitions discussed, 406, 430, 440; postal sta- tion, 633, 634; post road to Kas., 633, 646; rept. of Cong. com. on petitions, 105-109; resols. of Cong., 146-147; rights of settlers guaran- teed, 40, 58; Sargent to citizens, 292- 293; survey of land claims, 107, 406; trade, 440, 516, 571; troops at, 33, 51. See also Knox County. Vincent, A., s. petition, 424. Ving, see Winn. Vining, John, member com. 398. Viollotte (Viollet),—, Gal. prop., 505; s. petition, 425. Virginia, 39, 92, 408, 410; act of ces- sion, 6-9, mentioned, 18, 69, 77, 134, 145, 155-156, 172, 189, 297; alter, of cession, 172-173, mentioned, 19; bound. mil. reserv., 445; Indian hostilities and frontier defense, 31, 34, 51, 142, 151, 158, 159, 168, 216, 339, 363; land claims, 274-276, grants to be confirmed, 40, 324, men- tioned, 108; laws on frontier to be enforced, 57-58; mil. lands: act granting, 296-298, mentioned, 8, 18, 72, 155-156, 295, 321, 478, status, 639; opposition to N.Y. claims, 6; settlements in 111. under sanction of, 68, 285; Todd appd. Co. It., 93. Visinier, —, s. petition, 424. Vonschriltz, —, s. petition, 424. Wabash (Ouabachi, Ouabashe) Indians, 56; agreement, 374-375; hostilities, 31-35, 227-228. 245, 361; rels. with Gr. Brit., 380-381; rels. with U.S., 310, 313-314, 374-375, 380, 445, 621; treaty proposed and discussed, 33- 34, 50, 197, 225, 227-228, 413, 414. Wabash (Ouabachi, Ouabashe) River, 30, 32, 48, 92, 101, 105, 106, 107, 108, 231, 362, 375, 380, 381, 472,
Page 693
INDEX 693 477, 527, 528, 546, 568; as bound., 75, 130, 172, 444, 445; Fr. settlers on, 205, 325; goods seized on, 544; Indian rels. on, 192, 198, 216, 227- 228, 307, 374, 380; lands mentioned, 64, 78, 211; trade, 570. Wa-bat-thoe, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 532. Wab-shi-caw-naw, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Wa-che-ness, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Wack, —, Gal. prop., 505. Waddell, David, s. petition, 253. Waddell, Isaac, s. petition, 253. Waddell, Jesse, s. petition, 253. Wadsworth, Jeremiah, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 61, 95, 105, 108, 111, 425, 436, 506. Wager, —, pay. to, 608. Wallace, George, supt. of land sale, 562, 566, 583. Wa-pa-man-gwa (White Loon), Miami chief, s. treaty, 532. Wapaskea, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 179. Wap-me-me (White Pigeon), Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 533. Ware, George, land claim, 275; s. peti- tion, 253. Washington, George, Pres. of the U.S., 46, 204, 219, 220, 298, 299, 310, 321, 342, 359, 370, 378, 389, 395, 396, 412, 435, 437, 444, 450, 495, 498, 525, 534, 539, 557. See also President. Washington, George, see Que-shawk- sey. Washington (Ky.), 608; dist. from Cincinnati, 501, Preston (Ky.), 501; postal station, 541, 542, 603; post rider from Preston to, 502. Washington County, 461, 601, 613, 622; div., 612, 617-618; organiz., 152; tenure officials, 432. See also Mari- etta. Washington County (Pa.), 599. Wasp, The, see Anachout. Watts, John, 414. Watts, Robert, land claim, 274. Wa-wa-sek, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Wa-we-eg-she, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. Wayne, Gen. Anthony, 409, 411, 454, 488, 531, 592, 598, 599, 603, 605, 626, 644, 651; descrip. and recom- mends. re frontier posts, 569-572; error in describing Sp.-Am. bound., 572; establishes Detroit govt., 564, 576; Indian campaign and pol., 455-456, 507, 525-535, 537; instrs. to furnish escort, 408; letters men- tioned to Gov. Shelby, 486, Sec. War, 508; letters to Sec. Treas., 569-572, 584; opinions re: Wilkin- son, 487, trade conditions, 569-572; procl., 452; question of instrs. as Indian commr., 476. Wayne County, 612; attitude towards represent. govt., 578; bound., 567; Brit, subjects in, 623; jud. organiz., 568-569; need of official represent., 623; no. inhabs. mentioned, 655; procl. creating, 567-568. See also Detroit. Way-the-ah (Long Shanks), Shaw, chief, s. treaty, 531. Wea (Weya) Indians, 375, 380-381, 529; treaty with, 525-535. Welle-baw-kee-lund, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. Wells, William, comm. as judge chang- ed, 456. Wells, William, interp. treaty, 534. We-na-me-ac, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 532. West, The, emig. to, depletes pop. Altantic States, 168. West, Isaac, land claim, 276; s. peti- tion, 253. Western Reserve, provision for, by Conn., 23. Westfall, Abraham, s. petition, 636. Westfall, John, s. petitions, 621, 636. West Florida, emig. to, encouraged, 168-169, 214-215. Wetenasa, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 179. Wewiskia, Ott. chief, s. treaty, 179. Wey-a-pier-sen-waw (Blue Jacket), Shaw, chief, s. treaty, 531. Wey-me-gwas, Chip. chief, s. treaty, 532. Wey-tha-pa-mat-tha, Shaw, chief, s. treaty, 531. Wey-Win-quis (Billy Siscomb), Dela. chief, s. treaty, 531. Wheeling (Va.), 142, 490, 626; dist. to Bel Pre, 489, to Limestone, 551, to Marietta, 489, to Phila., 551; mail boats from Marietta, 503, 508, Pittsburgh, 504; postal station, 482, 485, 586, 594, 595, 603, 604, 608, 652; post rider from Pittsburgh, 503. Whiskey Rebellion. attitude of St. Clair towards, 458. White, Alexander, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 61, 95, 98, 105, 108, 425, 436. White (Whitte), Layton (Laton), land claim, 275, 276; s. petition, 253. White Eyes, Capt., land for descend- ants, 64. White Loon, see Wa-pa-man-gwa. White Pigeon, see Wap-me-me. White River, 546; bound. line, 75, 92. Whitesides, James, s. petition, 253. Whitesides, John, s. petition, 253. Whitesides, William, jr., s. petition, 253 Whitesides, William, sr., s. petition, 253. Wilkes, Jean, not. pub., N.Y., 466, 468. Wilkinson, Gen. James, 380, 385, 398, 400, 402, 487, 607, 608; instrs. men- tioned, 404, 408, to Hamtramck, 380, 382; letters mentioned to Sec. War,
Page 694
694 INDEX 409, 487; letter to J. Edgar and W. St. Clair, 627; to furnish escort: for Sargent, 622, surveyors, 592, 605, 606, 628, 644; to support civil au- thority in 111., 627. Willard, A., s. petition, 424. Williams, Abraham, interp. treaty, 534. Williams, —, Dep. Q.M., Ft. Washing- ton, letter mentioned to Sec. War, 486, 487. Williams, Elie, grant to, 653, 656, 657. Williams, Isaac, jr., chief of Wyan., 626, dispatch bearer, 157; s. treaty, 532, witness treaty, 179. Williams, Nathan, appd. j.p., Wayne Co., 568. Williamson, Hugh, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 110,112,130,135,139,140,144, 145, 146, 148, 149, 150, 153, 156. Willson, Ann, widow, s. petitions, 621, 636. Willson, Robert, interp. treaty, 534. Willstown, postal station, 652. Wilmore, John, s. petition, 636. Wilson, James, rept. on memorial, 115-117; s. memorial, Ill.-Wab. Land co., 387. Wilson, John, s. petition, 640. Wilson, Robert, s. petition, 640. Wilson, William, dispatch bearer, 160, 163, 164, 165; letters mentioned to W. Butler, 131, St. Clair, 121, 142; witness treaty, 179. Wily, Thomas, s. petition, 640. Winder, John, s. petition, 640. Windigo, Potawa. chief, s. treaty, 179. Wingate, Paine, Cong. com. on ter. affs., 110,112. Winn (Ving, Wine), Thomas (Tomas), land claim, 267, 268, 270, 271, 276; Pr. du Pont census, 260; s. petitions, 250, 282. Wingenond, Dela. chief, s. treaty, 179. Wisconsin (Ouisconsing) River, trade route, 571. Wolcott, Oliver, jr., 392, 522, 524, 572, 584, 588, 594, 598, 603, 605, 607, 609, 616, 626, 628, 632, 641, 644, 645, 646, 647, 649, 650, 653, 654, 656, 657. See also Secretary of the Treasury. Wolf Creek, no. settlers, 470. Wood, Charles, s. petition, 253. Wood, Lt. Gov. James (Va.), 409. Woodbridge, Dudley, 605, 606, 607, 631, 653. Wood Bug, see Chishekoa. Wood River, as bound., 75, 113. Woods, J., 109. Worley, Samuel, s. petition, 253. Wright, Jonathan, s. petition, 640. Writs of error, discussed, 42. Wyandot Indians, 128-129, 142, 165, 219, 220, 337-339, 364, 446, 529, 626; bound., 230-231, 445; messages men- tioned to Harmar, 224, St. Clair, 121, 140-141,157,164-165; rel. with other tribes, 192-193, 362, 363; treaties mentioned, 174, 179, 360, 361; treaties, 174-181, 525-535. Wyllys, Maj. John Plasgrave, 27, 167, 283; death, 313; letters mentioned to Harmar, 26, St. Clair, 167. Young Ox, see Pe-shaw-kay. Zane, Col. Ebenezer, 142, 626, 641; note, 550; petition to Cong., 550-552. Zane, Isaac, arrives with family at Ft. Harmar, 142; interp. treaty, 534; view as to correct bound., 625-626. Zane's route, 586. Zanes, postal station, 652. Zeigler, Capt. David, carries duplicates act Cong., 136; to escort Senecas, 143. Zipp, Peter, land claim, 275. o
Page 695
Blank page
Page 696
Blank page
Page 697
Blank page
Page 698
C. 3*

End of Index. Continue to next section or 
End of text. Return to .

